Remember the essays you had to write in high school? Topic sentence, introductory paragraph, supporting paragraphs, conclusion. The conclusion being, say, that Ahab in Moby Dick was a Christ-like figure.

Oy. So I'm going to try to give the other side of the story: what an essay really is, and how you write one. Or at least, how I write one.

Mods

The most obvious difference between real essays and the things one has to write in school is that real essays are not exclusively about English literature. Certainly schools should teach students how to write. But due to a series of historical accidents the teaching of writing has gotten mixed together with the study of literature. And so all over the country students are writing not about how a baseball team with a small budget might compete with the Yankees, or the role of color in fashion, or what constitutes a good dessert, but about symbolism in Dickens.

With the result that writing is made to seem boring and pointless. Who cares about symbolism in Dickens? Dickens himself would be more interested in an essay about color or baseball.

How did things get this way? To answer that we have to go back almost a thousand years. Around 1100, Europe at last began to catch its breath after centuries of chaos, and once they had the luxury of curiosity they rediscovered what we call "the classics." The effect was rather as if we were visited by beings from another solar system. These earlier civilizations were so much more sophisticated that for the next several centuries the main work of European scholars, in almost every field, was to assimilate what they knew.

During this period the study of ancient texts acquired great prestige. It seemed the essence of what scholars did. As European scholarship gained momentum it became less and less important; by 1350 someone who wanted to learn about science could find better teachers than Aristotle in his own era. [1] But schools change slower than scholarship. In the 19th century the study of ancient texts was still the backbone of the curriculum.

The time was then ripe for the question: if the study of ancient texts is a valid field for scholarship, why not modern texts? The answer, of course, is that the original raison d'etre of classical scholarship was a kind of intellectual archaeology that does not need to be done in the case of contemporary authors. But for obvious reasons no one wanted to give that answer. The archaeological work being mostly done, it implied that those studying the classics were, if not wasting their time, at least working on problems of minor importance.

And so began the study of modern literature. There was a good deal of resistance at first. The first courses in English literature seem to have been offered by the newer colleges, particularly American ones. Dartmouth, the University of Vermont, Amherst, and University College, London taught English literature in the 1820s. But Harvard didn't have a professor of English literature until 1876, and Oxford not till 1885. (Oxford had a chair of Chinese before it had one of English.) [2]

What tipped the scales, at least in the US, seems to have been the idea that professors should do research as well as teach. This idea (along with the PhD, the department, and indeed the whole concept of the modern university) was imported from Germany in the late 19th century. Beginning at Johns Hopkins in 1876, the new model spread rapidly.

Writing was one of the casualties. Colleges had long taught English composition. But how do you do research on composition? The professors who taught math could be required to do original math, the professors who taught history could be required to write scholarly articles about history, but what about the professors who taught rhetoric or composition? What should they do research on? The closest thing seemed to be English literature. [3]

And so in the late 19th century the teaching of writing was inherited by English professors. This had two drawbacks: (a) an expert on literature need not himself be a good writer, any more than an art historian has to be a good painter, and (b) the subject of writing now tends to be literature, since that's what the professor is interested in.

High schools imitate universities. The seeds of our miserable high school experiences were sown in 1892, when the National Education Association "formally recommended that literature and composition be unified in the high school course." [4] The 'riting component of the 3 Rs then morphed into English, with the bizarre consequence that high school students now had to write about English literature-- to write, without even realizing it, imitations of whatever English professors had been publishing in their journals a few decades before.

It's no wonder if this seems to the student a pointless exercise, because we're now three steps removed from real work: the students are imitating English professors, who are imitating classical scholars, who are merely the inheritors of a tradition growing out of what was, 700 years ago, fascinating and urgently needed work.

No Defense

The other big difference between a real essay and the things they make you write in school is that a real essay doesn't take a position and then defend it. That principle, like the idea that we ought to be writing about literature, turns out to be another intellectual hangover of long forgotten origins.

It's often mistakenly believed that medieval universities were mostly seminaries. In fact they were more law schools. And at least in our tradition lawyers are advocates, trained to take either side of an argument and make as good a case for it as they can. Whether cause or effect, this spirit pervaded early universities. The study of rhetoric, the art of arguing persuasively, was a third of the undergraduate curriculum. [5] And after the lecture the most common form of discussion was the disputation. This is at least nominally preserved in our present-day thesis defense: most people treat the words thesis and dissertation as interchangeable, but originally, at least, a thesis was a position one took and the dissertation was the argument by which one defended it.

Defending a position may be a necessary evil in a legal dispute, but it's not the best way to get at the truth, as I think lawyers would be the first to admit. It's not just that you miss subtleties this way. The real problem is that you can't change the question.

And yet this principle is built into the very structure of the things they teach you to write in high school. The topic sentence is your thesis, chosen in advance, the supporting paragraphs the blows you strike in the conflict, and the conclusion-- uh, what is the conclusion? I was never sure about that in high school. It seemed as if we were just supposed to restate what we said in the first paragraph, but in different enough words that no one could tell. Why bother? But when you understand the origins of this sort of "essay," you can see where the conclusion comes from. It's the concluding remarks to the jury.

Good writing should be convincing, certainly, but it should be convincing because you got the right answers, not because you did a good job of arguing. When I give a draft of an essay to friends, there are two things I want to know: which parts bore them, and which seem unconvincing. The boring bits can usually be fixed by cutting. But I don't try to fix the unconvincing bits by arguing more cleverly. I need to talk the matter over.

At the very least I must have explained something badly. In that case, in the course of the conversation I'll be forced to come up a with a clearer explanation, which I can just incorporate in the essay. More often than not I have to change what I was saying as well. But the aim is never to be convincing per se. As the reader gets smarter, convincing and true become identical, so if I can convince smart readers I must be near the truth.

The sort of writing that attempts to persuade may be a valid (or at least inevitable) form, but it's historically inaccurate to call it an essay. An essay is something else.

Trying

To understand what a real essay is, we have to reach back into history again, though this time not so far. To Michel de Montaigne, who in 1580 published a book of what he called "essais." He was doing something quite different from what lawyers do, and the difference is embodied in the name. Essayer is the French verb meaning "to try" and an essai is an attempt. An essay is something you write to try to figure something out.

Figure out what? You don't know yet. And so you can't begin with a thesis, because you don't have one, and may never have one. An essay doesn't begin with a statement, but with a question. In a real essay, you don't take a position and defend it. You notice a door that's ajar, and you open it and walk in to see what's inside.

If all you want to do is figure things out, why do you need to write anything, though? Why not just sit and think? Well, there precisely is Montaigne's great discovery. Expressing ideas helps to form them. Indeed, helps is far too weak a word. Most of what ends up in my essays I only thought of when I sat down to write them. That's why I write them.

In the things you write in school you are, in theory, merely explaining yourself to the reader. In a real essay you're writing for yourself. You're thinking out loud.

But not quite. Just as inviting people over forces you to clean up your apartment, writing something that other people will read forces you to think well. So it does matter to have an audience. The things I've written just for myself are no good. They tend to peter out. When I run into difficulties, I find I conclude with a few vague questions and then drift off to get a cup of tea.

Many published essays peter out in the same way. Particularly the sort written by the staff writers of newsmagazines. Outside writers tend to supply editorials of the defend-a-position variety, which make a beeline toward a rousing (and foreordained) conclusion. But the staff writers feel obliged to write something "balanced." Since they're writing for a popular magazine, they start with the most radioactively controversial questions, from which-- because they're writing for a popular magazine-- they then proceed to recoil in terror. Abortion, for or against? This group says one thing. That group says another. One thing is certain: the question is a complex one. (But don't get mad at us. We didn't draw any conclusions.)

The River

Questions aren't enough. An essay has to come up with answers. They don't always, of course. Sometimes you start with a promising question and get nowhere. But those you don't publish. Those are like experiments that get inconclusive results. An essay you publish ought to tell the reader something he didn't already know.

But what you tell him doesn't matter, so long as it's interesting. I'm sometimes accused of meandering. In defend-a-position writing that would be a flaw. There you're not concerned with truth. You already know where you're going, and you want to go straight there, blustering through obstacles, and hand-waving your way across swampy ground. But that's not what you're trying to do in an essay. An essay is supposed to be a search for truth. It would be suspicious if it didn't meander.

The Meander (aka Menderes) is a river in Turkey. As you might expect, it winds all over the place. But it doesn't do this out of frivolity. The path it has discovered is the most economical route to the sea. [6]

The river's algorithm is simple. At each step, flow down. For the essayist this translates to: flow interesting. Of all the places to go next, choose the most interesting. One can't have quite as little foresight as a river. I always know generally what I want to write about. But not the specific conclusions I want to reach; from paragraph to paragraph I let the ideas take their course.

This doesn't always work. Sometimes, like a river, one runs up against a wall. Then I do the same thing the river does: backtrack. At one point in this essay I found that after following a certain thread I ran out of ideas. I had to go back seven paragraphs and start over in another direction.

Fundamentally an essay is a train of thought-- but a cleaned-up train of thought, as dialogue is cleaned-up conversation. Real thought, like real conversation, is full of false starts. It would be exhausting to read. You need to cut and fill to emphasize the central thread, like an illustrator inking over a pencil drawing. But don't change so much that you lose the spontaneity of the original.

Err on the side of the river. An essay is not a reference work. It's not something you read looking for a specific answer, and feel cheated if you don't find it. I'd much rather read an essay that went off in an unexpected but interesting direction than one that plodded dutifully along a prescribed course.

Surprise

So what's interesting? For me, interesting means surprise. Interfaces, as Geoffrey James has said, should follow the principle of least astonishment. A button that looks like it will make a machine stop should make it stop, not speed up. Essays should do the opposite. Essays should aim for maximum surprise.

I was afraid of flying for a long time and could only travel vicariously. When friends came back from faraway places, it wasn't just out of politeness that I asked what they saw. I really wanted to know. And I found the best way to get information out of them was to ask what surprised them. How was the place different from what they expected? This is an extremely useful question. You can ask it of the most unobservant people, and it will extract information they didn't even know they were recording.

Surprises are things that you not only didn't know, but that contradict things you thought you knew. And so they're the most valuable sort of fact you can get. They're like a food that's not merely healthy, but counteracts the unhealthy effects of things you've already eaten.

How do you find surprises? Well, therein lies half the work of essay writing. (The other half is expressing yourself well.) The trick is to use yourself as a proxy for the reader. You should only write about things you've thought about a lot. And anything you come across that surprises you, who've thought about the topic a lot, will probably surprise most readers.

For example, in a recent essay I pointed out that because you can only judge computer programmers by working with them, no one knows who the best programmers are overall. I didn't realize this when I began that essay, and even now I find it kind of weird. That's what you're looking for.

So if you want to write essays, you need two ingredients: a few topics you've thought about a lot, and some ability to ferret out the unexpected.

What should you think about? My guess is that it doesn't matter-- that anything can be interesting if you get deeply enough into it. One possible exception might be things that have deliberately had all the variation sucked out of them, like working in fast food. In retrospect, was there anything interesting about working at Baskin-Robbins? Well, it was interesting how important color was to the customers. Kids a certain age would point into the case and say that they wanted yellow. Did they want French Vanilla or Lemon? They would just look at you blankly. They wanted yellow. And then there was the mystery of why the perennial favorite Pralines 'n' Cream was so appealing. (I think now it was the salt.) And the difference in the way fathers and mothers bought ice cream for their kids: the fathers like benevolent kings bestowing largesse, the mothers harried, giving in to pressure. So, yes, there does seem to be some material even in fast food.

I didn't notice those things at the time, though. At sixteen I was about as observant as a lump of rock. I can see more now in the fragments of memory I preserve of that age than I could see at the time from having it all happening live, right in front of me.

Observation

So the ability to ferret out the unexpected must not merely be an inborn one. It must be something you can learn. How do you learn it?

To some extent it's like learning history. When you first read history, it's just a whirl of names and dates. Nothing seems to stick. But the more you learn, the more hooks you have for new facts to stick onto-- which means you accumulate knowledge at what's colloquially called an exponential rate. Once you remember that Normans conquered England in 1066, it will catch your attention when you hear that other Normans conquered southern Italy at about the same time. Which will make you wonder about Normandy, and take note when a third book mentions that Normans were not, like most of what is now called France, tribes that flowed in as the Roman empire collapsed, but Vikings (norman = north man) who arrived four centuries later in 911. Which makes it easier to remember that Dublin was also established by Vikings in the 840s. Etc, etc squared.

Collecting surprises is a similar process. The more anomalies you've seen, the more easily you'll notice new ones. Which means, oddly enough, that as you grow older, life should become more and more surprising. When I was a kid, I used to think adults had it all figured out. I had it backwards. Kids are the ones who have it all figured out. They're just mistaken.

When it comes to surprises, the rich get richer. But (as with wealth) there may be habits of mind that will help the process along. It's good to have a habit of asking questions, especially questions beginning with Why. But not in the random way that three year olds ask why. There are an infinite number of questions. How do you find the fruitful ones?

I find it especially useful to ask why about things that seem wrong. For example, why should there be a connection between humor and misfortune? Why do we find it funny when a character, even one we like, slips on a banana peel? There's a whole essay's worth of surprises there for sure.

If you want to notice things that seem wrong, you'll find a degree of skepticism helpful. I take it as an axiom that we're only achieving 1% of what we could. This helps counteract the rule that gets beaten into our heads as children: that things are the way they are because that is how things have to be. For example, everyone I've talked to while writing this essay felt the same about English classes-- that the whole process seemed pointless. But none of us had the balls at the time to hypothesize that it was, in fact, all a mistake. We all thought there was just something we weren't getting.

I have a hunch you want to pay attention not just to things that seem wrong, but things that seem wrong in a humorous way. I'm always pleased when I see someone laugh as they read a draft of an essay. But why should I be? I'm aiming for good ideas. Why should good ideas be funny? The connection may be surprise. Surprises make us laugh, and surprises are what one wants to deliver.

I write down things that surprise me in notebooks. I never actually get around to reading them and using what I've written, but I do tend to reproduce the same thoughts later. So the main value of notebooks may be what writing things down leaves in your head.

People trying to be cool will find themselves at a disadvantage when collecting surprises. To be surprised is to be mistaken. And the essence of cool, as any fourteen year old could tell you, is nil admirari. When you're mistaken, don't dwell on it; just act like nothing's wrong and maybe no one will notice.

One of the keys to coolness is to avoid situations where inexperience may make you look foolish. If you want to find surprises you should do the opposite. Study lots of different things, because some of the most interesting surprises are unexpected connections between different fields. For example, jam, bacon, pickles, and cheese, which are among the most pleasing of foods, were all originally intended as methods of preservation. And so were books and paintings.

Whatever you study, include history-- but social and economic history, not political history. History seems to me so important that it's misleading to treat it as a mere field of study. Another way to describe it is all the data we have so far.

Among other things, studying history gives one confidence that there are good ideas waiting to be discovered right under our noses. Swords evolved during the Bronze Age out of daggers, which (like their flint predecessors) had a hilt separate from the blade. Because swords are longer the hilts kept breaking off. But it took five hundred years before someone thought of casting hilt and blade as one piece.

Disobedience

Above all, make a habit of paying attention to things you're not supposed to, either because they're "inappropriate," or not important, or not what you're supposed to be working on. If you're curious about something, trust your instincts. Follow the threads that attract your attention. If there's something you're really interested in, you'll find they have an uncanny way of leading back to it anyway, just as the conversation of people who are especially proud of something always tends to lead back to it.

For example, I've always been fascinated by comb-overs, especially the extreme sort that make a man look as if he's wearing a beret made of his own hair. Surely this is a lowly sort of thing to be interested in-- the sort of superficial quizzing best left to teenage girls. And yet there is something underneath. The key question, I realized, is how does the comber-over not see how odd he looks? And the answer is that he got to look that way incrementally. What began as combing his hair a little carefully over a thin patch has gradually, over 20 years, grown into a monstrosity. Gradualness is very powerful. And that power can be used for constructive purposes too: just as you can trick yourself into looking like a freak, you can trick yourself into creating something so grand that you would never have dared to plan such a thing. Indeed, this is just how most good software gets created. You start by writing a stripped-down kernel (how hard can it be?) and gradually it grows into a complete operating system. Hence the next leap: could you do the same thing in painting, or in a novel?

See what you can extract from a frivolous question? If there's one piece of advice I would give about writing essays, it would be: don't do as you're told. Don't believe what you're supposed to. Don't write the essay readers expect; one learns nothing from what one expects. And don't write the way they taught you to in school.

The most important sort of disobedience is to write essays at all. Fortunately, this sort of disobedience shows signs of becoming rampant. It used to be that only a tiny number of officially approved writers were allowed to write essays. Magazines published few of them, and judged them less by what they said than who wrote them; a magazine might publish a story by an unknown writer if it was good enough, but if they published an essay on x it had to be by someone who was at least forty and whose job title had x in it. Which is a problem, because there are a lot of things insiders can't say precisely because they're insiders.

The Internet is changing that. Anyone can publish an essay on the Web, and it gets judged, as any writing should, by what it says, not who wrote it. Who are you to write about x? You are whatever you wrote.

Popular magazines made the period between the spread of literacy and the arrival of TV the golden age of the short story. The Web may well make this the golden age of the essay. And that's certainly not something I realized when I started writing this.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                             
T. A. Z.
The Temporary Autonomous Zone, Ontological Anarchy, Poetic
Terrorism
Hakim Bey
Autonomedia
Anti-copyright, 1985, 1991. May be freely pirated & quoted--
the author & publisher, however, would like to be informed
at:
Autonomedia
P. O. Box 568
Williamsburgh Station
Brooklyn, NY 11211-0568
Book design & typesetting: Dave Mandl
Printed in the United States of America

[ This document was created from the original typesetting files for TAz and
  it is not a transcription. Because of this, there should be no errors in 
  the text that were not put there by the author. If any are found, please
  contact mimir@u.washington.edu (Grendel Grettisson) and report them since
  he was the last of the editors to go over the document and has the master
  ASCII text copy. No changes were made in this document except for the
  addition of extra blank lines between paragraphs when necessary for
  readability as a text file (as opposed to a book) and the substitution of 
  underscores ('_') around and between words and phrases in the place of
  italics, which cannot be shown in ASCII text. ]


CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, _vii_

CHAOS: THE BROADSHEETS OF ONTOLOGICAL ANARCHISM, _1_
Chaos, _3_; Poetic Terrorism, _4_; Amour Fou, _6_; Wild
Children, _8_; Paganism, _9_; Art Sabotage, _11_; The
Assassins, _13_; Pyrotechnics, _14_; Chaos Myths, _15_;
Pornography, _19_; Crime, _21_; Sorcery, _22_;
Advertisement,  _24_

COMMUNIQUES OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR ONTOLOGICAL ANARCHY, _25_
Communique #1: I. Slogans & Mottos for Subway Graffiti &
Other Purposes, _27_; II. Some Poetic-Terrorist Ideas Still
Sadly Languishing in the Realm of "Conceptual Art," _28_;
Communique #2: The Kallikak Memorial Bolo & Chaos Ashram: A
Proposal, _30_; Communique #3: Haymarket Issue, _32_;
Communique #4: The End of the World, _33_; Communique #5:
"Intellectual S/M Is the Fascism of the Eighties--The Avant-
Garde Eats Shit and Likes It," _36_; Communique #6: I. Salon
Apocalypse: "Secret Theater," _39_; II. Murder--War--Famine-
-Greed, _41_; Communique #7: Psychic Paleolithism & High
Technology: A Position Paper, _43_; Communique #8: Chaos
Theory & the Nuclear Family, _47_; Communique #9: Double-Dip
Denunciations, _48_; Communique #10: Plenary Session Issues
New Denunciations--Purges Expected, _50_; Communique #11:
Special Holiday Season Food Issue Rant: Turn Off the Lite!,
_53_; Special Halloween Communique: Black Magic as
Revolutionary Action, _56_; Special Communique: A.O.A.
Announces Purges in Chaos Movement, _59_; Post-Anarchism
Anarchy, _61_; Black Crown & Black Rose: Anarcho-Monarchism
& Anarcho-Mysticism, _64_; Instructions for the Kali Yuga,
_72_; Against the Reproduction of Death, _75_; Ringing
Denunciation of Surrealism, _78_; For a Congress of Weird
Religions, _80_; Hollow Earth, _84_; Nietzsche & the
Dervishes, _86_; Resolution for the 1990's: Boycott Cop
Culture!!!, _90_

THE TEMPORARY AUTONOMOUS ZONE, _95_
Pirate Utopias, _97_; Waiting for the Revolution, _99_; The
Psychotopology of Everyday Life, _102_; The Net and the Web,
_108_; "Gone to Croatan," _116_; Music as an Organizational
Principle, _124_; The Will To Power as Disappearance, _128_;
Ratholes in the Babylon of Information, _132_; Appendix A:
Chaos Linguistics, _135_; Appendix B: Applied Hedonics,
_137_; Appendix C: Extra Quotes, _138_

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

_CHAOS:_THE_BROADSHEETS_OF_ONTOLOGICAL_ANARCHISM_ was first
published in 1985 by Grim Reaper Press of Weehawken, New
Jersey; a later re-issue was published in Providence, Rhode
Island, and this edition was pirated in Boulder, Colorado.
Another edition was released by Verlag Golem of Providence
in 1990, and pirated in Santa Cruz, California, by We Press.
"The Temporary Autonomous Zone" was performed at the Jack
Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics in Boulder, and on
WBAI-FM in New York City, in 1990.
Thanx to the following publications, current and defunct, in
which some of these pieces appeared (no doubt I've lost or
forgotten many--sorry!): _KAOS_ (London); _Ganymede_
(London); _Pan_ (Amsterdam); _Popular_Reality_;
_Exquisite_Corpse_ (also _Stiffest_of_the_Corpse_, City
Lights); _Anarchy_ (Columbia, MO); _Factsheet_Five_;
_Dharma_Combat_; _OVO_; _City_Lights_Review_;
_Rants_and_Incendiary_Tracts_ (Amok); _Apocalypse_Culture_
(Amok); _Mondo_2000_; _The_Sporadical_; _Black_Eye_;
_Moorish_Science_Monitor_; _FEH!_; _Fag_Rag_; _The_Storm!_;
_Panic_ (Chicago); _Bolo_Log_ (Zurich); _Anathema_;
_Seditious_Delicious_; _Minor_Problems_ (London); _AQUA_;
_Prakilpana_.
Also, thanx to the following individuals: Jim Fleming; James
Koehnline; Sue Ann Harkey; Sharon Gannon; Dave Mandl; Bob
Black; Robert Anton Wilson; William Burroughs; "P.M."; Joel
Birroco; Adam Parfrey; Brett Rutherford; Jake Rabinowitz;
Allen Ginsberg; Anne Waldman; Frank Torey; Andr. Codrescu;
Dave Crowbar; Ivan Stang; Nathaniel Tarn; Chris Funkhauser;
Steve Englander; Alex Trotter.
--March, 1991

CHAOS: THE BROADSHEETS OF ONTOLOGICAL ANARCHISM
(Dedicated to Ustad Mahmud Ali Abd al-Khabir)

Chaos

CHAOS NEVER DIED. Primordial uncarved block, sole worshipful
monster, inert & spontaneous, more ultraviolet than any
mythology (like the shadows before Babylon), the original
undifferentiated oneness-of-being still radiates serene as
the black pennants of Assassins, random & perpetually
intoxicated.

Chaos comes before all principles of order & entropy, it's
neither a god nor a maggot, its idiotic desires encompass &
define every possible choreography, all meaningless aethers
& phlogistons: its masks are crystallizations of its own
facelessness, like clouds.

Everything in nature is perfectly real including
consciousness, there's absolutely nothing to worry about.
Not only have the chains of the Law been broken, they never
existed; demons never guarded the stars, the Empire never
got started, Eros never grew a beard.

No, listen, what happened was this: they lied to you, sold
you ideas of good & evil, gave you distrust of your body &
shame for your prophethood of chaos, invented words of
disgust for your molecular love, mesmerized you with
inattention, bored you with civilization & all its usurious
emotions.

There is no becoming, no revolution, no struggle, no path;
already you're the monarch of your own skin--your inviolable
freedom waits to be completed only by the love of other
monarchs: a politics of dream, urgent as the blueness of
sky.

To shed all the illusory rights & hesitations of history
demands the economy of some legendary Stone Age--shamans not
priests, bards not lords, hunters not police, gatherers of
paleolithic laziness, gentle as blood, going naked for a
sign or painted as birds, poised on the wave of explicit
presence, the clockless nowever.

Agents of chaos cast burning glances at anything or anyone
capable of bearing witness to their condition, their fever
of _lux_et_voluptas_. I am awake only in what I love &
desire to the point of terror--everything else is just
shrouded furniture, quotidian anaesthesia, shit-for-brains,
sub-reptilian ennui of totalitarian regimes, banal
censorship & useless pain.

Avatars of chaos act as spies, saboteurs, criminals of amour
fou, neither selfless nor selfish, accessible as children,
mannered as barbarians, chafed with obsessions, unemployed,
sensually deranged, wolfangels, mirrors for contemplation,
eyes like flowers, pirates of all signs & meanings.

Here we are crawling the cracks between walls of church
state school & factory, all the paranoid monoliths. Cut off
from the tribe by feral nostalgia we tunnel after lost
words, imaginary bombs.
The last possible _deed_ is that which defines perception
itself, an invisible golden cord that connects us: illegal
dancing in the courthouse corridors. If I were to kiss you
here they'd call it an act of terrorism--so let's take our
pistols to bed & wake up the city at midnight like drunken
bandits celebrating with a fusillade, the message of the
taste of chaos.

Poetic Terrorism

WEIRD DANCING IN ALL-NIGHT computer-banking lobbies.
Unauthorized pyrotechnic displays. Land-art, earth-works as
bizarre alien artifacts strewn in State Parks. Burglarize
houses but instead of stealing, leave Poetic-Terrorist
objects. Kidnap someone & make them happy.
Pick someone at random & convince them they're the heir to
an enormous, useless & amazing fortune--say 5000 square
miles of Antarctica, or an aging circus elephant, or an
orphanage in Bombay, or a collection of alchemical mss.
Later they will come to realize that for a few moments they
believed in something extraordinary, & will perhaps be
driven as a result to seek out some more intense mode of
existence.

Bolt up brass commemorative plaques in places (public or
private) where you have experienced a revelation or had a
particularly fulfilling sexual experience, etc.

Go naked for a sign.

Organize a strike in your school or workplace on the grounds
that it does not satisfy your need for indolence & spiritual
beauty.

Grafitti-art loaned some grace to ugly subways & rigid
public momuments--PT-art can also be created for public
places: poems scrawled in courthouse lavatories, small
fetishes abandoned in parks & restaurants, xerox-art under
windshield-wipers of parked cars, Big Character Slogans
pasted on playground walls, anonymous letters mailed to
random or chosen recipients (mail fraud), pirate radio
transmissions, wet cement...

The audience reaction or aesthetic-shock produced by PT
ought to be at least as strong as the emotion of terror--
powerful disgust, sexual arousal, superstitious awe, sudden
intuitive breakthrough, dada-esque angst--no matter whether
the PT is aimed at one person or many, no matter whether it
is "signed" or anonymous, if it does not change someone's
life (aside from the artist) it fails.

PT is an act in a Theater of Cruelty which has no stage, no
rows of seats, no tickets & no walls. In order to work at
all, PT must categorically be divorced from all conventional
structures for art consumption (galleries, publications,
media). Even the guerilla Situationist tactics of street
theater are perhaps too well known & expected now.

An exquisite seduction carried out not only in the cause of
mutual satisfaction but also as a conscious act in a
deliberately beautiful life--may be the ultimate PT. The
PTerrorist behaves like a confidence-trickster whose aim is
not money but CHANGE.

Don't do PT for other artists, do it for people who will not
realize (at least for a few moments) that what you have done
is art. Avoid recognizable art-categories, avoid politics,
don't stick around to argue, don't be sentimental; be
ruthless, take risks, vandalize only what _must_ be defaced,
do something children will remember all their lives--but
don't be spontaneous unless the PT Muse has possessed you.

Dress up. Leave a false name. Be legendary. The best PT is
against the law, but don't get caught. Art as crime; crime
as art.

Amour Fou

AMOUR FOU IS NOT a Social Democracy, it is not a Parliament
of Two. The minutes of its secret meetings deal with
meanings too enormous but too precise for prose. Not this,
not that--its Book of Emblems trembles in your hand.

Naturally it shits on schoolmasters & police, but it sneers
at liberationists & ideologues as well--it is not a clean
well-lit room. A topological charlatan laid out its
corridors & abandoned parks, its ambush-decor of luminous
black & membranous maniacal red.

Each of us owns half the map--like two renaissance
potentates we define a new culture with our anathematized
mingling of bodies, merging of liquids--the Imaginal seams
of our City-state blur in our sweat.

Ontological anarchism never came back from its last fishing
trip. So long as no one squeals to the FBI, CHAOS cares
nothing for the future of civilization. Amour fou breeds
only by accident--its primary goal is ingestion of the
Galaxy. A conspiracy of transmutation.

Its only concern for the Family lies in the possibility of
incest ("Grow your own!" "Every human a Pharoah!")--O most
sincere of readers, my semblance, my brother/sister!--& in
the masturbation of a child it finds concealed (like a
japanese-paper-flower-pill) the image of the crumbling of
the State.

Words belong to those who use them only till someone else
steals them back. The Surrealists disgraced themselves by
selling amour fou to the ghost-machine of Abstraction--they
sought in their unconsciousness only power over others, & in
this they followed de Sade (who wanted "freedom" only for
grown-up whitemen to eviscerate women & children).

Amour fou is saturated with its own aesthetic, it fills
itself to the borders of itself with the trajectories of its
own gestures, it runs on angels' clocks, it is not a fit
fate for commissars & shopkeepers. Its ego evaporates in the
mutability of desire, its communal spirit withers in the
selfishness of obsession.

Amour fou involves non-ordinary sexuality the way sorcery
demands non-ordinary consciousness. The anglo-saxon post-
Protestant world channels all its suppressed sensuality into
advertising & splits itself into clashing mobs: hysterical
prudes vs promiscuous clones & former-ex-singles. AF doesn't
want to join anyone's army, it takes no part in the Gender
Wars, it is bored by equal opportunity employment (in fact
it refuses to work for a living), it doesn't complain,
doesn't explain, never votes & never pays taxes.

AF would like to see every bastard ("lovechild") come to
term & birthed--AF thrives on anti-entropic devices--AF
loves to be molested by children--AF is better than prayer,
better than sinsemilla--AF takes its own palmtrees & moon
wherever it goes. AF admires tropicalismo, sabotage, break-
dancing, Layla & Majnun, the smells of gunpowder & sperm.

AF is always illegal, whether it's disguised as a marriage
or a boyscout troop--always drunk, whether on the wine of
its own secretions or the smoke of its own polymorphous
virtues. It is not the derangement of the senses but rather
their apotheosis--not the result of freedom but rather its
precondition. _Lux_et_voluptas_.

Wild Children

THE FULL MOON'S UNFATHOMABLE light-path--mid-May midnight in
some State that starts with "I," so two-dimensional it can
scarcely be said to possess any geography at all--the beams
so urgent & tangible you must draw the shades in order to
think in words.

No question of _writing_to_ Wild Children. They think in
images--prose is for them a code not yet fully digested &
ossified, just as for us never fully trusted.

You may write _about_ them, so that others who have lost the
silver chain may follow. Or write _for_ them, making of
STORY & EMBLEM a process of seduction into your own
paleolithic memories, a barbaric enticement to liberty
(chaos as CHAOS understands it).

For this otherworld species or "third sex,"
_les_enfants_sauvages_, fancy & Imagination are still
undifferentiated. Unbridled PLAY: at one & the same time the
source of our Art & of all the race's rarest eros.

To embrace disorder both as wellspring of style & voluptuous
storehouse, a fundamental of our alien & occult
civilization, our conspiratorial esthetic, our lunatic
espionage--this is the action (let's face it) either of an
artist of some sort, or of a ten- or thirteen-year-old.

Children whose clarified senses betray them into a brilliant
sorcery of beautiful pleasure reflect something feral &
smutty in the nature of reality itself: natural ontological
anarchists, angels of chaos--their gestures & body odors
broadcast around them a jungle of presence, a forest of
prescience complete with snakes, ninja weapons, turtles,
futuristic shamanism, incredible mess, piss, ghosts,
sunlight, jerking off, birds' nests & eggs--gleeful
aggression against the groan-ups of those Lower Planes so
powerless to englobe either destructive epiphanies or
creation in the form of antics fragile but sharp enough to
slice moonlight.

And yet the denizens of these inferior jerkwater dimensions
truly believe they control the destinies of Wild Children--&
_down_here_, such vicious beliefs actually sculpt most of
the substance of happenstance.

The only ones who actually wish to _share_ the mischievous
destiny of those savage runaways or minor guerillas rather
than dictate it, the only ones who can understand that
cherishing & unleashing are the _same_act_--these are mostly
artists, anarchists, perverts, heretics, a band apart (as
much from each other as from the world) or able to meet only
as wild children might, locking gazes across a dinnertable
while adults gibber from behind their masks.

Too young for Harley choppers--flunk-outs, break-dancers,
scarcely pubescent poets of flat lost railroad towns--a
million sparks falling from the skyrockets of Rimbaud &
Mowgli--slender terrorists whose gaudy bombs are compacted
of polymorphous love & the precious shards of popular
culture--punk gunslingers dreaming of piercing their ears,
animist bicyclists gliding in the pewter dusk through
Welfare streets of accidental flowers--out-of-season gypsy
skinny-dippers, smiling sideways-glancing thieves of power-
totems, small change & panther-bladed knives--we sense them
everywhere--we publish this offer to trade the corruption of
our own _lux_et_gaudium_ for their perfect gentle filth.

So get this: our realization, our liberation depends on
_theirs_--not because we ape the Family, those "misers of
love" who hold hostages for a banal future, nor the State
which schools us all to sink beneath the event-horizon of a
tedious "usefulness"--no--but because _we_&_they_, the wild
ones, are images of each other, linked & bordered by that
silver chain which defines the pale of sensuality,
transgression & vision.

We share the same enemies & our means of triumphant escape
are also the same: a delirious & obsessive _play_, powered
by the spectral brilliance of the wolves & their children.

Paganism

CONSTELLATIONS BY WHICH TO steer the barque of the soul.
"If the moslem understood Islam he would become an idol-
worshipper."--Mahmud Shabestari
Eleggua, ugly opener of doors with a hook in his head &
cowrie shells for eyes, black santeria cigar & glass of rum-
-same as Ganesh, elephant-head fat boy of Beginnings who
rides a mouse.
The organ which senses the numinous atrophies with the
senses. Those who cannot feel baraka cannot know the caress
of the world.

Hermes Poimandres taught the animation of eidolons, the
magic in-dwelling of icons by spirits--but those who cannot
perform this rite on themselves & on the whole palpable
fabric of material being will inherit only blues, rubbish,
decay.

The pagan body becomes a Court of Angels who all perceive
this place--this very grove--as paradise ("If there is a
paradise, surely it is _here_!"--inscription on a Mughal
garden gate)..
But ontological anarchism is too paleolithic for eschatology-
-things are real, sorcery works, bush-spirits one with the
Imagination, death an unpleasant vagueness--the plot of
Ovid's _Metamorphoses_--an epic of mutability. The personal
mythscape.

Paganism has not yet invented laws--only virtues. No
priestcraft, no theology or metaphysics or morality--but a
universal shamanism in which no one attains real humanity
without a vision.
Food money sex sleep sun sand & sinsemilla--love truth peace
freedom & justice. Beauty. Dionysus the drunk boy on a
panther--rank adolescent sweat--Pan goatman slogs through
the solid earth up to his waist as if it were the sea, his
skin crusted with moss & lichen--Eros multiplies himself
into a dozen pastoral naked Iowa farm boys with muddy feet &
pond-scum on their thighs.

Raven, the potlatch trickster, sometimes a boy, old woman,
bird who stole the Moon, pine needles floating on a pond,
Heckle/Jeckle totempole-head, chorus-line of crows with
silver eyes dancing on the woodpile--same as Semar the
hunchback albino hermaphrodite shadow-puppet patron of the
Javanese revolution.

Yemaya, bluestar sea-goddess & patroness of queers--same as
Tara, bluegrey aspect of Kali, necklace of skulls, dancing
on Shiva's stiff lingam, licking monsoon clouds with her
yard-long tongue--same as Loro Kidul, jasper-green Javanese
sea-goddess who bestows the power of invulnerability on
sultans by tantrik intercourse in magic towers & caves.

>From one point of view ontological anarchism is extremely
bare, stripped of all qualities & possessions, poor as CHAOS
itself--but from another point of view it pullulates with
baroqueness like the Fucking-Temples of Kathmandu or an
alchemical emblem book--it sprawls on its divan eating
loukoum & entertaining heretical notions, one hand inside
its baggy trousers.
The hulls of its pirate ships are lacquered black, the
lateen sails are red, black banners with the device of a
winged hourglass.

A South China Sea of the mind, off a jungle-flat coast of
palms, rotten gold temples to unknown bestiary gods, island
after island, the breeze like wet yellow silk on naked skin,
navigating by pantheistic stars, hierophany on hierophany,
light upon light against the luminous & chaotic dark.

Art Sabotage

ART SABOTAGE STRIVES TO be perfectly exemplary but at the
same time retain an element of opacity--not propaganda but
aesthetic shock--apallingly direct yet also subtly angled--
action-as-metaphor.

Art Sabotage is the dark side of Poetic Terrorism--creation-
through-destruction--but it cannot serve any Party, nor any
nihilism, nor even art itself. Just as the banishment of
illusion enhances awareness, so the demolition of aesthetic
blight sweetens the air of the world of discourse, of the
Other. Art Sabotage serves only consciousness,
attentiveness, awakeness.

A-S goes beyond paranoia, beyond deconstruction--the
ultimate criticism--physical attack on offensive art--
aesthetic jihad. The slightest taint of petty ego-icity or
even of personal taste spoils its purity & vitiates its
force. A-S can never seek power--only _release_ it.

Individual artworks (even the worst) are largely irrelevant-
-A-S seeks to damage institutions which use art to diminish
consciousness & profit by delusion. This or that poet or
painter cannot be condemned for lack of vision--but malign
Ideas can be assaulted through the artifacts they generate.
MUZAK is designed to hypnotize & control--its machinery can
be smashed.

Public book burnings--why should rednecks & Customs
officials monopolize this weapon? Novels about children
possessed by demons; the _New_York_Times_ bestseller list;
feminist tracts against pornography; schoolbooks (especially
Social Studies, Civics, Health); piles of _New_York_Post_,
_Village_Voice_ & other supermarket papers; choice gleanings
of Xtian publishers; a few Harlequin Romances--a festive
atmosphere, wine-bottles & joints passed around on a clear
autumn afternoon.

To throw money away at the Stock Exchange was pretty decent
Poetic Terrorism--but to _destroy_ the money would have been
good Art Sabotage. To seize TV transmission & broadcast a
few pirated minutes of incendiary Chaote art would
constitute a feat of PT--but simply to blow up the
transmission tower would be perfectly adequate Art Sabotage.
If certain galleries & museums deserve an occasional brick
through their windows--not destruction, but a jolt to
complacency--then what about BANKS? Galleries turn beauty
into a commodity but banks transmute Imagination into feces
and debt. Wouldn't the world gain a degree of beauty with
each bank that could be made to tremble...or fall? But how?
Art Sabotage should probably stay away from politics (it's
so boring)--but not from banks.

Don't picket--vandalize. Don't protest--deface. When
ugliness, poor design & stupid waste are forced upon you,
turn Luddite, throw your shoe in the works, retaliate. Smash
the symbols of the Empire in the name of nothing but the
heart's longing for grace.

The Assassins

ACROSS THE LUSTER OF the desert & into the polychrome hills,
hairless & ochre violet dun & umber, at the top of a
dessicate blue valley travelers find an artificial oasis, a
fortified castle in saracenic style enclosing a hidden
garden.

As guests of the Old Man of the Mountain Hassan-i Sabbah
they climb rock-cut steps to the castle. Here the Day of
Resurrection has already come & gone--those within live
outside profane Time, which they hold at bay with daggers &
poisons.

Behind crenellations & slit-windowed towers scholars &
fedayeen wake in narrow monolithic cells. Star-maps,
astrolabes, alembics & retorts, piles of open books in a
shaft of morning sunlight--an unsheathed scimitar.

Each of those who enter the realm of the _Imam-of-one's-own-
being_ becomes a sultan of inverted revelation, a monarch of
abrogation & apostasy. In a central chamber scalloped with
light and hung with tapestried arabesques they lean on
bolsters & smoke long chibouks of haschisch scented with
opium & amber.

For them the hierarchy of being has compacted to a
dimensionless punctum of the real--for them the chains of
Law have been broken--they end their fasting with wine. For
them the outside of everything is its inside, its true face
shines through direct. But the garden gates are camouflaged
with terrorism, mirrors, rumors of assassination, trompe
l'oeil, legends.

Pomegranate, mulberry, persimmon, the erotic melancholy of
cypresses, membrane-pink shirazi roses, braziers of meccan
aloes & benzoin, stiff shafts of ottoman tulips, carpets
spread like make-believe gardens on actual lawns--a pavilion
set with a mosaic of calligrammes--a willow, a stream with
watercress--a fountain crystalled underneath with geometry--
the metaphysical scandal of bathing odalisques, of wet brown
cupbearers hide-&-seeking in the foliage--"water, greenery,
beautiful faces."

By night Hassan-i Sabbah like a civilized wolf in a turban
stretches out on a parapet above the garden & glares at the
sky, conning the asterisms of heresy in the mindless cool
desert air. True, in this myth some aspirant disciples may
be ordered to fling themselves off the ramparts into the
black--but also true that some of them will learn to fly
like sorcerers.

The emblem of Alamut holds in the mind, a _mandal_ or magic
circle lost to history but embedded or imprinted in
consciousness. The Old Man flits like a ghost into tents of
kings & bedrooms of theologians, past all locks & guards
with forgotten moslem/ninja techniques, leaves behind bad
dreams, stilettos on pillows, puissant bribes.

The attar of his propaganda seeps into the criminal dreams
of ontological anarchism, the heraldry of our obsessions
displays the luminous black outlaw banners of the
Assassins...all of them pretenders to the throne of an
Imaginal Egypt, an occult space/light continuum consumed by
still-unimagined liberties.

Pyrotechnics

INVENTED BY THE CHINESE but never developed for war--a fine
example of Poetic Terrorism--a weapon used to trigger
aesthetic shock rather than kill--the Chinese hated war &
used to go into mourning when armies were raised--gunpowder
more useful to frighten malign demons, delight children,
fill the air with brave & risky-smelling haze.

Class C Thunder Bombs from Kwantung, bottlerockets,
butterflies, M-80's, sunflowers, "A Forest In Springtime"--
revolution weather--light your cigarette from the sizzling
fuse of a Haymarket-black bomb--imagine the air full of
lamiae & succubi, oppressive spirits, police-ghosts.
Call some kid with a smouldering punk or kitchen match--
shaman-apostle of summer gunpowder plots--shatter the heavy
night with pinched stars & pumped stars, arsenic & antimony,
sodium & calomel, a blitz of magnesium & shrill picrate of
potash.

Spur-fire (lampblack & saltpetre) portfire & iron filings--
attack your local bank or ugly church with roman candles &
purple-gold skyrockets, impromptu & anonymous (perhaps
launch from back of pick-up truck..)

Build frame-lattice lancework set-pieces on the roofs of
insurance buildings or schools--a kundalini-snake or Chaos-
dragon coiled barium-green against a background of sodium-
oxalate yellow--Don't Tread On Me--or copulating monsters
shooting wads of jizm-fire at a Baptists old folks home.

Cloud-sculpture, smoke sculpture & flags = Air Art.
Earthworks. Fountains = Water Art. And Fireworks. Don't
perform with Rockefeller grants & police permits for
audiences of culture-lovers. Evanescent incendiary mind-
bombs, scary mandalas flaring up on smug suburban nights,
alien green thunderheads of emotional plague blasted by
orgone-blue vajra-rays of lasered _feux_d'artifice_.

Comets that explode with the odor of hashish & radioactive
charcoal--swampghouls & will-o'-the-wisps haunting public
parks--fake St. Elmo's fire flickering over the architecture
of the bourgeoisie--strings of lady-fingers falling on the
Legislature floor--salamander-elementals attack well-known
moral reformers.

Blazing shellac, sugar of milk, strontium, pitch, gum water,
gerbs of chinese fire--for a few moments the air is ozone-
sharp--drifting opal cloud of pungent dragon/phoenix smoke.
For an instant the Empire falls, its princes & governors
flee to their stygian muck, plumes of sulphur from elf-
flamethrowers burning their pinched asses as they retreat.
The Assassin-child, psyche of fire, holds sway for one brief
dogstar-hot night.

Chaos Myths

Unseen Chaos (po-te-kitea)
Unpossessed, Unpassing
Chaos of utter darkness
Untouched & untouchable
--Maori Chant

Chaos perches on a sky-mountain: a huge bird like a yellow
bag or red fireball, with six feet & four wings--has no face
but dances & sings.

Or Chaos is a black longhaired dog, blind & deaf, lacking
the five viscera.
Chaos the Abyss comes first, then Earth/Gaia, then
Desire/Eros. From these three proceed two pairs--Erebus &
old Night, Aether & Daylight.

Neither Being nor Non-being
neither air nor earth nor space:
what was enclosed? where? under whose
protection?
What was water, deep, unfathomable?
Neither death nor immortality, day nor night--
but ONE breathed by itself with no wind.
Nothing else. Darkness swathed in darkness,
unmanifest water.
The ONE, hidden by void,
felt the generation of heat, came into being
as Desire, first seed of Mind...
Was there an up or down?
There were casters of seed, there were powers:
energy underneath, impulse above.
But who knows for sure?
--_Rg_Veda_

Tiamat the Chaos-Ocean slowly drops from her womb Silt &
Slime, the Horizons, Sky and watery Wisdom. These offspring
grow noisy & bumptious--she considers their destruction.

But Marduk the wargod of Babylon rises in rebellion against
the Old Hag & her Chaos-monsters, chthonic totems--Worm,
Female Ogre, Great Lion, Mad Dog, Scorpion Man, Howling
Storm--dragons wearing their glory like gods--& Tiamat
herself a great sea-serpent.

Marduk accuses her of causing sons to rebel against fathers-
-she loves Mist & Cloud, principles of disorder. Marduk will
be the first to rule, to invent government. In battle he
slays Tiamat & from her body orders the material universe.
He inaugurates the Babylonian Empire--then from gibbets &
bloody entrails of Tiamat's incestuous son he creates the
human race to serve forever the comfort of gods--& their
high priests & anointed kings.

Father Zeus & the Olympians wage war against Mother Gaia &
the Titans, those partisans of Chaos, the old ways of
hunting & gathering, of aimless wandering, androgyny & the
license of beasts.

Amon-Ra (Being) sits alone in the primordial Chaos-Ocean of
NUN creating all the other gods by jerking off--but Chaos
also manifests as the dragon Apophis whom Ra must destroy
(along with his state of glory, his shadow & his magic) in
order that the Pharoah may safely rule--a victory ritually
re-created daily in Imperial temples to confound the enemies
of the State, of cosmic Order.

Chaos is Hun Tun, Emperor of the Center. One day the South
Sea, Emperor Shu, & the North Sea, Emperor Hu (_shu_hu_ =
lightning) paid a visit to Hun Tun, who always treated them
well. Wishing to repay his kindness they said, "All beings
have seven orifices for seeing, hearing, eating, shitting,
etc.--but poor old Hun Tun has none! Let's drill some into
him!" So they did--one orifice a day--till on the seventh
day, Chaos died.

But...Chaos is also an enormous chicken's egg. Inside it
P'an-Ku is born & grows for 18,000 years--at last the egg
opens up, splits into sky & earth, yang & yin. Now P'an-Ku
grows into a column that holds up the universe--or else he
_becomes_ the universe (breath-->wind, eyes-->sun & moon,
blood & humors-->rivers & seas, hair & lashes-->stars &
planets, sperm-->pearls, marrow-->jade, his fleas-->human
beings, etc.)

Or else he becomes the man/monster Yellow Emperor. Or else
he becomes Lao Tzu, prophet of Tao. In fact, poor old Hun
Tun is the Tao itself.

"Nature's music has no existence outside things. The various
apertures, pipes, flutes, all living beings together make up
nature. The "I" cannot produce things & things cannot
produce the "I," which is self-existent. Things are what
they are spontaneously, not caused by something else.
Everything is natural & does not know why it is so. The
10,000 things have 10,000 different states, all in motion as
if there were a True Lord to move them--but if we search for
evidence of this Lord we fail to find any." (Kuo Hsiang)

Every realized consciousness is an "emperor" whose sole form
of rule is to do nothing to disturb the spontaneity of
nature, the Tao. The "sage" is not Chaos itself, but rather
a loyal child of Chaos--one of P'an-Ku's fleas, a fragment
of flesh of Tiamat's monstrous son. "Heaven and Earth," says
Chuang Tzu, "were born at the same time I was, & the 10,000
things are one with me."

Ontological Anarchism tends to disagree only with the
Taoists' total quietism. In our world Chaos has been
overthrown by younger gods, moralists, phallocrats, banker-
priests, fit lords for serfs. If rebellion proves impossible
then at least a kind of clandestine spiritual jihad might be
launched. Let it follow the war-banners of the anarchist
black dragon, Tiamat, Hun Tun.

Chaos never died.

Pornography

IN PERSIA I SAW that poetry is meant to be set to music &
chanted or sung--for one reason alone--because it _works_.

A right combination of image & tune plunges the audience
into a _hal_ (something between emotional/aesthetic mood &
trance of hyperawareness), outbursts of weeping, fits of
dancing--measurable physical response to art. For us the
link between poetry & body died with the bardic era--we read
under the influence of a cartesian anaesthetic gas.

In N. India even non-musical recitation provokes noise &
motion, each good couplet applauded, "Wa! Wa!" with elegant
hand-jive, tossing of rupees--whereas we listen to poetry
like some SciFi brain in a jar--at best a wry chuckle or
grimace, vestige of simian rictus--the rest of the body off
on some other planet.

In the East poets are sometimes thrown in prison--a sort of
compliment, since it suggests the author has done something
at least as real as theft or rape or revolution. Here poets
are allowed to publish anything at all--a sort of punishment
in effect, prison without walls, without echoes, without
palpable existence--shadow-realm of print, or of abstract
thought--world without risk or _eros_.

So poetry is dead again--& even if the mumia from its corpse
retains some healing properties, auto-resurrection isn't one
of them.

If rulers refuse to consider poems as crimes, then someone
must commit crimes that serve the function of poetry, or
texts that possess the resonance of terrorism. At any cost
re-connect poetry to the body. Not crimes against bodies,
but against Ideas (& Ideas-in-things) which are deadly &
suffocating. Not stupid libertinage but exemplary crimes,
aesthetic crimes, crimes for love.
In England some pornographic books are still banned.
Pornography has a measurable physical effect on its readers.
Like propaganda it sometimes changes lives because it
uncovers true desires.

Our culture produces most of its porn out of body-hatred--
but erotic art in itself makes a better vehicle for
enhancement of being/consciousness/bliss--as in certain
oriental works. A sort of Western tantrik porn might help
galvanize the corpse, make it shine with some of the glamor
of crime.

America has freedom of speech because all words are
considered equally vapid. Only _images_ count--the censors
love snaps of death & mutilation but recoil in horror at the
sight of a child masturbating--apparently they experience
this as an invasion of their existential validity, their
identification with the Empire & its subtlest gestures.

No doubt even the most poetic porn would never revive the
faceless corpse to dance & sing (like the Chinese Chaos-
bird)--but...imagine a script for a three-minute film set on
a mythical isle of runaway children who inhabit ruins of old
castles or build totem-huts & junk-assemblage nests--mixture
of animation, special-effects, compugraphix & color tape--
edited tight as a fastfood commercial...

...but weird & naked, feathers & bones, tents sewn with
crystal, black dogs, pigeon-blood--flashes of amber limbs
tangled in sheets--faces in starry masks kissing soft
creases of skin--androgynous pirates, castaway faces of
columbines sleeping on thigh-white flowers--nasty hilarious
piss jokes, pet lizards lapping spilt milk--nude break-
dancing--victorian bathtub with rubber ducks & pink boners--
Alice on ganja...

...atonal punk reggae scored for gamelan, synthesizer,
saxophones & drums--electric boogie lyrics sung by aetherial
children's choir--ontological anarchist lyrics, cross
between Hafez & Pancho Villa, Li Po & Bakunin, Kabir & Tzara-
-call it "CHAOS--the Rock Video!"
No...probably just a dream. Too expensive to produce, &
besides, who would see it? Not the kids it was meant to
seduce. Pirate TV is a futile fantasy, rock merely another
commodity--forget the slick gesamtkunstwerk, then. Leaflet a
playground with inflammatory smutty feuilletons--
pornopropaganda, crackpot samizdat to unchain Desire from
its bondage.

Crime

JUSTICE CANNOT BE OBTAINED under any Law--action in accord
with spontaneous nature, action which is just, cannot be
defined by dogma. The crimes advocated in these broadsheets
cannot be committed against self or other but only against
the mordant crystallization of Ideas into structures of
poisonous Thrones & Dominations.

That is, not crimes against nature or humanity but crimes by
legal fiat. Sooner or later the uncovering & unveiling of
self/nature transmogrifies a person into a brigand--like
stepping into another world then returning to this one to
discover you've been declared a traitor, heretic, exile.
The Law waits for you to stumble on a mode of being, a soul
different from the FDA-approved purple-stamped standard dead
meat--& as soon as you begin to act in harmony with nature
the Law garottes & strangles you--so don't play the blessed
liberal middleclass martyr--accept the fact that you're a
criminal & be prepared to act like one.

Paradox: to embrace Chaos is not to slide toward entropy but
to emerge into an energy like stars, a pattern of
instantaneous grace--a spontaneous organic order completely
different from the carrion pyramids of sultans, muftis,
cadis & grinning executioners.

After Chaos comes Eros--the principle of order implicit in
the nothingness of the unqualified One. Love is structure,
system, the only code untainted by slavery & drugged sleep.
We must become crooks & con-men to protect its spiritual
beauty in a bezel of clandestinity, a hidden garden of
espionage.

Don't just survive while waiting for someone's revolution to
clear your head, don't sign up for the armies of anorexia or
bulimia--act as if you were already free, calculate the
odds, step out, remember the Code Duello--Smoke Pot/Eat
Chicken/Drink Tea. Every man his own vine & figtree
(_Circle_Seven_Koran_, Noble Drew Ali)--carry your Moorish
passport with pride, don't get caught in the crossfire, keep
your back covered--but take the risk, dance before you
calcify.
The natural social model for ontological anarchism is the
child-gang or the bank-robbers-band. Money is a lie--this
adventure must be feasible without it--booty & pillage
should be spent before it turns back into dust. Today is
Resurrection Day--money wasted on beauty will be
alchemically transmuted into elixir. As my uncle Melvin used
to say, stolen watermelon tastes sweeter.
The world is already re-made according to the heart's desire-
-but civilization owns all the leases & most of the guns.
Our feral angels demand we trespass, for they manifest
themselves only on forbidden grounds. High Way Man. The yoga
of stealth, the lightning raid, the enjoyment of treasure.

Sorcery

THE UNIVERSE WANTS TO PLAY. Those who refuse out of dry
spiritual greed & choose pure contemplation forfeit their
humanity--those who refuse out of dull anguish, those who
hesitate, lose their chance at divinity--those who mold
themselves blind masks of Ideas & thrash around seeking some
proof of their own solidity end by seeing out of dead men's
eyes.

Sorcery: the systematic cultivation of enhanced
consciousness or non-ordinary awareness & its deployment in
the world of deeds & objects to bring about desired results.

The incremental openings of perception gradually banish the
false selves, our cacophonous ghosts--the "black magic" of
envy & vendetta backfires because Desire cannot be forced.
Where our knowledge of beauty harmonizes with the
_ludus_naturae_, sorcery begins.

No, not spoon-bending or horoscopy, not the Golden Dawn or
make-believe shamanism, astral projection or the Satanic
Mass--if it's mumbo jumbo you want go for the real stuff,
banking, politics, social science--not that weak blavatskian
crap.

Sorcery works at creating around itself a psychic/physical
space or openings into a space of untrammeled expression--
the metamorphosis of quotidian place into angelic sphere.
This involves the manipulation of symbols (which are also
things) & of people (who are also symbolic)--the archetypes
supply a vocabulary for this process & therefore are treated
as if they were both real & unreal, like words. Imaginal
Yoga.

The sorcerer is a Simple Realist: the world is real--but
then so must consciousness be real since its effects are so
tangible. The dullard finds even wine tasteless but the
sorcerer can be intoxicated by the mere sight of water.
Quality of perception defines the world of intoxication--but
to sustain it & expand it to include _others_ demands
activity of a certain kind--sorcery.
Sorcery breaks no law of nature because there is no Natural
Law, only the spontaneity of _natura_naturans_, the tao.
Sorcery violates laws which seek to chain this flow--
priests, kings, hierophants, mystics, scientists &
shopkeepers all brand the sorcerer _enemy_ for threatening
the power of their charade, the tensile strength of their
illusory web.

A poem can act as a spell & vice versa--but sorcery refuses
to be a metaphor for mere literature--it insists that
symbols must cause events as well as private epiphanies. It
is not a critique but a re-making. It rejects all
eschatology & metaphysics of removal, all bleary nostalgia &
strident futurismo, in favor of a paroxysm or seizure of
_presence_.

Incense & crystal, dagger & sword, wand, robes, rum, cigars,
candles, herbs like dried dreams--the virgin boy staring
into a bowl of ink--wine & ganja, meat, yantras & gestures--
rituals of pleasure, the garden of houris & sakis--the
sorcerer climbs these snakes & ladders to a moment which is
fully saturated with its own color, where mountains are
mountains & trees are trees, where the body becomes all
time, the beloved all space.

The tactics of ontological anarchism are rooted in this
secret Art--the goals of ontological anarchism appear in its
flowering. Chaos hexes its enemies & rewards its
devotees...this strange yellowing pamphlet, pseudonymous &
dust-stained, reveals all...send away for one split second
of eternity.

Advertisement

WHAT THIS TELLS YOU is not prose. It may be pinned to the
board but it's still alive & wriggling. It does not want to
seduce you unless you're extremely young & good-looking
(enclose recent photo).

Hakim Bey lives in a seedy Chinese hotel where the
proprietor nods out over newspaper & scratchy broadcasts of
Peking Opera. The ceiling fan turns like a sluggish dervish-
-sweat falls on the page--the poet's kaftan is rusty, his
ovals spill ash on the rug--his monologues seem disjointed &
slightly sinister--outside shuttered windows the barrio
fades into palmtrees, the naive blue ocean, the philosophy
of tropicalismo.

Along a highway somewhere east of Baltimore you pass an
Airstream trailer with a big sign on the lawn SPIRITUAL
READINGS & the image of a crude black hand on a red
background. Inside you notice a display of dream-books,
numbers-books, pamphlets on HooDoo and Santeria, dusty old
nudist magazines, a pile of _Boy's_Life_, treatises on
fighting-cocks...& this book, _Chaos_. Like words spoken in
a dream, portentous, evanescent, changing into perfumes,
birds, colors, forgotten music.

This book distances itself by a certain impassibility of
surface, almost a glassiness. It doesn't wag its tail & it
doesn't snarl but it bites & humps the furniture. It doesn't
have an ISBN number & it doesn't want you for a disciple but
it might kidnap your children.

This book is nervous like coffee or malaria--it sets up a
network of cut-outs & safe drops between itself & its
readers--but it's so baldfaced & literal-minded it
practically encodes itself--it smokes itself into a stupor.

A mask, an automythology, a map without placenames--stiff as
an egyptian wallpainting nevertheless it reaches to caress
someone's face--& suddenly finds itself out in the street,
in a body, embodied in light, walking, awake, almost
satisfied.

--NYC, May 1-July 4, 1984

COMMUNIQUES OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR ONTOLOGICAL ANARCHY

COMMUNIQUE #1 (SPRING 1986)

I. Slogans & Mottos for Subway Graffiti & Other Purposes
ROOTLESS COSMOPOLITANISM
POETIC TERRORISM
(for scrawling or rubberstamping on advertisements:)
THIS IS YOUR TRUE DESIRE
MARXISM-STIRNERISM
STRIKE FOR INDOLENCE & SPIRITUAL BEAUTY
YOUNG CHILDREN HAVE BEAUTIFUL FEET
THE CHAINS OF LAW HAVE BEEN BROKEN
TANTRIK PORNOGRAPHY
RADICAL ARISTOCRATISM
KIDS' LIB URBAN GUERILLAS
IMAGINARY SHIITE FANATICS
BOLO'BOLO
GAY ZIONISM
(SODOM FOR THE SODOMITES)
PIRATE UTOPIAS
CHAOS NEVER DIED

Some of these are "sincere" slogans of the A.O.A.--others
are meant to rouse public apprehension & misgivings--but
we're not sure which is which. Thanx to Stalin, Anon., Bob
Black, Pir Hassan (upon his mention be peace), F. Nietzsche,
Hank Purcell Jr., "P.M.," & Bro. Abu Jehad al-Salah of the
Moorish Temple of Dagon.

II. Some Poetic-Terrorist Ideas Still Sadly Languishing in
the Realm of "Conceptual Art"

1. Walk into Citibank or Chembank computer customer service
area during busy period, take a shit on the floor, & leave.

2. Chicago May Day '86: organize "religious" procession for
Haymarket "Martyrs"--huge banners with sentimental
portraits, wreathed in flowers & streaming with tinsel &
ribbon, borne by penitenti in black KKKatholic-style hooded
gowns--outrageous campy TV acolytes with incense & holy
water sprinkle the crowd--anarchists w/ash-smeared faces
beat themselves with little flails & whips--a "Pope" in
black robes blesses tiny symbolic coffins reverently carried
to Cemetery by weeping punks. Such a spectacle ought to
offend _nearly_everyone_.

3. Paste up in public places a xerox flyer, photo of a
beautiful twelve-year-old boy, naked and masturbating,
clearly titled: THE FACE OF GOD.

4. Mail elaborate & exquisite magickal "blessings"
_anonymously_ to people or groups you admire, e.g. for their
politics or spirituality or physical beauty or success in
crime, etc. Follow the same general procedure as outlined in
Section 5 below, but utilize an aesthetic of good fortune,
bliss or love, as appropriate.

5. Invoke a terrible curse on a malign _institution_, such
as the _New_York_Post_ or the MUZAK company. A technique
adapted from Malaysian sorcerers: send the Company a package
containing a bottle, corked and sealed with black wax.
Inside: dead insects, scorpions, lizards or the like; a bag
containing graveyard dirt ("gris-gris" in American HooDoo
terminology) along with other noxious substances; an egg,
pierced with iron nails and pins; and a scroll on which an
emblem is drawn (see p. 57).

(This _yantra_ or _veve_ invokes the Black Djinn, the Self's
dark shadow. Full details obtainable from the A.O.A.) An
accompanying note explains that the hex is sent against the
_institution_ & not against individuals--but unless the
institution itself _ceases_to_be_malign_, the curse (like a
mirror) will begin to infect the premises with noxious
fortune, a miasma of negativity. Prepare a "news release"
explaining the curse & taking credit for it in the name of
the American Poetry Society. Mail copies of this text to all
employees of the institution & to selected media. The night
before these letters arrive, wheatpaste the institutional
premises with xerox copies of the Black Djinn's emblem,
where they will be seen by all employees arriving for work
next morning.

(Thanx to Abu Jehad again, & to Sri Anamananda--the Moorish
Castellan of Belvedere Weather Tower--& other comrades of
the Central Park Autonomous Zone, & Brooklyn Temple Number
1)

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #2

The Kallikak Memorial Bolo & Chaos Ashram: A Proposal

NURSING AN OBSESSION FOR Airstream trailers--those classic
miniature dirigibles on wheels--& also the New Jersey Pine
Barrens, huge lost backlands of sandy creeks & tar pines,
cranberry bogs & ghost towns, population around 14 per sq.
mile, dirt roads overgrown with fern, brokenspine cabins &
isolated rusty mobile homes with burnt-out cars in the front
yards
land of the mythical Kallikaks--Piney families studied by
eugenicists in the 1920's to justify sterilization of rural
poor. Some Kallikaks married well, prospered, & waxed
bourgeois thanx to good genes--others however never worked
real jobs but lived off the woods--incest, sodomy, mental
deficiencies galore--photos touched up to make them look
vacant & morose--descended from rogue Indians, Hessian
mercenaries, rum smugglers, deserters--Lovecraftian
degenerates
come to think of it the Kallikaks might well have produced
secret Chaotes, precursor sex radicals, Zerowork prophets.
Like other monotone landscapes (desert, sea, swamp), the
Barrens seem infused with erotic power--not vril or orgone
so much as a languid disorder, almost a sluttishness of
Nature, as if the very ground & water were formed of sexual
flesh, membranes, spongy erectile tissue. We want to squat
there, maybe an abandoned hunting/fishing lodge with old
woodstove & privy--or decaying Vacation Cabins on some
disused County Highway--or just a woodlot where we park 2 or
3 Airstreams hidden back in the pines near creek or swimming
hole. Were the Kallikaks onto something good? We'll find out

somewhere boys dream that extraterrestrials will come to
rescue them from their families, perhaps vaporizing the
parents with some alien ray in the process. Oh well. Space
Pirate Kidnap Plot Uncovered--"Alien" Unmasked As Shiite
Fanatic Queer Poet--UFOs Seen Over Pine Barrens--"Lost Boys
Will Leave Earth," Claims So-Called Prophet Of Chaos Hakim
Bey
runaway boys, mess & disorder, ecstasy & sloth, skinny-
dipping, childhood as permanent insurrection--collections of
frogs, snails, leaves--pissing in the moonlight--11, 12, 13-
-old enough to seize back control of one's own history from
parents, school, Welfare, TV--Come live with us in the
Barrens--we'll cultivate a local brand of seedless rope to
finance our luxuries & contemplation of summer's alchemy--&
otherwise produce nothing but artifacts of Poetic Terrorism
& mementos of our pleasures

going for aimless rides in the old pickup, fishing &
gathering, lying around in the shade reading comics & eating
grapes--this is our economy. The suchness of things when
unchained from the Law, each molecule an orchid, each atom a
pearl to the attentive consciousness--this is our cult. The
Airstream is draped with Persian rugs, the lawn is profuse
with satisfied weeds

the treehouse becomes a wooden spaceship in the nakedness of
July & midnight, half-open to the stars, warm with epicurean
sweat, rushed & then hushed by the breathing of the Pines.
(Dear _Bolo_Log_: You asked for a practical & feasible
utopia--here it is, no mere post-holocaust fantasy, no
castles on the moon of Jupiter--a scheme we could start up
tomorrow--except that every single aspect of it breaks some
law, reveals some absolute taboo in U.S. society, threatens
the very fabric of etc., etc. Too bad. This is our true
desire, & to attain it we must contemplate not only a life
of pure art but also pure crime, pure insurrection. Amen.)

(Thanx to the Grim Reaper & other members of the Si Fan
Temple of Providence for YALU, GANO, SILA, & ideas)

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #3

Haymarket Issue

"I NEED ONLY MENTION in passing that there is a curious
reappearance of the Catfish tradition in the popular
Godzilla cycle of films which arose after the nuclear chaos
unleashed upon Japan. In fact, the symbolic details in the
evolution of Godzilla filmic poplore parallel in a quite
surprising way the traditional Japanese and Chinese
mythological and folkloric themes of combat with an
ambivalent chaos creature (some of the films, like _Mothra_,
directly recalling the ancient motifs of the cosmic
egg/gourd/cocoon) that is usually tamed, after the failure
of the civilizational order, through the special and
indirect agency of children."--Girardot,
_Myth_&_Meaning_in_Early_Taoism:_The_Theme_of_Chaos__(hun-
t'un)_

In some old Moorish Science Temple (in Chicago or Baltimore)
a friend claimed to have seen a secret altar on which rested
a matched pair of six shooters (in velvet-lined case) & a
_black_ fez. Supposedly initiation to the inner circle
required the neophyte Moor to assassinate at least one cop.
/// What about Louis Lingg? Was he a precursor of
Ontological Anarchism? "I despise you"--one can't help but
admiring such sentiments. But the man dynamited himself aged
22 to cheat the gallows...this is not exactly our chosen
path. /// The IDEA of the POLICE like hydra grows 100 new
heads for each one cut off--and all these heads are
_live_cops_. Slicing off heads gains us nothing, but only
enhances the beast's power till it swallows us. /// First
murder the IDEA--blow up the monument _inside_us_--& then
perhaps...the balance of power will shift. When the last cop
in our brain is gunned down by the last unfulfilled desire--
perhaps even the landscape around us will begin to
change.../// Poetic Terrorism proposes this
_sabotage_of_archetypes_ as the only practical
insurrectionary tactic for the present. But as Shiite
Extremists eager for the overthrow (by any means) of all
police, ayatollahs, bankers, executioners, priests, etc., we
reserve the option of venerating even the "failures" of
radical excess. /// A few days unchained from the Empire of
Lies might well be worth considerable sacrifice; a moment of
exalted realization may outweigh a lifetime of microcephalic
boredom & work. /// But this moment must _become_ours_--and
our ownership of it is seriously compromised if we must
commit suicide to preserve its integrity. So we mix our
veneration with irony--it's not martyrdom itself we propose,
but the courage of the dynamiter, the self-possession of a
Chaos-monster, the attainment of criminal & illegal
pleasures.

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #4

The End of the World

THE A.O.A. DECLARES ITSELF officially _bored_ with the End
of the World. The canonical version has been used since 1945
to keep us cowering in fear of Mutual Assured Destruction &
in snivelling servitude to our super-hero politicians (the
only ones capable of handling deadly Green Kryptonite)...

What does it mean that we have invented a way to destroy all
life on Earth? Nothing much. We have _dreamed_ this as an
escape from the contemplation of our own individual deaths.
We have made an emblem to serve as the mirror-image of a
discarded immortality. Like demented dictators we swoon at
the thought of taking it _all_ down with us into the Abyss.

The unofficial version of the Apocalypse involves a
lascivious yearning for the End, & for a post-Holocaust Eden
where the Survivalists (or the 144,000 Elect of
_Revelations_) can indulge themselves in orgies of Dualist
hysteria, endless final confrontations with a seductive
evil...
We have seen the ghost of Rene Guenon, cadaverous & topped
with a fez (like Boris Karloff as Ardis Bey in _The_Mummy_)
leading a funereal No Wave Industrial-Noise rock band in
loud buzzing blackfly-chants for the death of Culture &
Cosmos: the elitist fetishism of pathetic nihilists, the
Gnostic self-disgust of "post-sexual" intellectoids.

Are these dreary ballads not simply mirror-images of all
those lies & platitudes about Progress & the Future, beamed
from every loudspeaker, zapped like paranoid brain-waves
from every schoolbook & TV in the world of the Consensus?
The thanatosis of the Hip Millenarians extrudes itself like
pus from the false _health_ of the Consumers' & Workers'
Paradises.

Anyone who can read history with both hemispheres of the
brain knows that a world comes to an end every instant--the
waves of time leave washed up behind themselves only dry
memories of a closed & petrified past--imperfect memory,
itself already dying & autumnal. And every instant also
gives birth to a world--despite the cavillings of
philosophers & scientists whose bodies have grown numb--a
present in which all impossibilities are renewed, where
regret & premonition fade to nothing in one presential
hologrammatical psychomantric gesture.

The "normative" past or the future heat-death of the
universe mean as little to us as last year's GNP or the
withering away of the State. All Ideal pasts, all futures
which have not yet come to pass, simply obstruct our
consciousness of total vivid presence.

Certain sects believe that the world (or "a" world) has
_already_come_to_an_end_. For Jehovah's Witnesses it
happened in 1914 (yes folks, we are living in the Book of
Revelations _now_). For certain oriental occultists, it
occurred during the Major Conjunction of the Planets in
1962. Joachim of Fiore proclaimed the Third Age, that of the
Holy Spirit, which replaced those of Father & Son. Hassan II
of Alamut proclaimed the Great Resurrection, the
immanentization of the eschaton, paradise on earth. Profane
time came to an end somewhere in the late Middle Ages. Since
then we've been living angelic time--only most of us don't
know it.

Or to take an even more Radical Monist stance: Time never
started at all. Chaos never died. The Empire was never
founded. We are not now & never have been slaves to the past
or hostages to the future.

We suggest that the End of the World be declared a
_fait_accompli_; the exact date is unimportant. The ranters
in 1650 knew that the Millenium comes _now_ into each soul
that wakes to itself, to its own centrality & divinity.
"Rejoice, fellow creature," was their greeting. "All is
ours!"

I want no part of any other End of the World. A boy smiles
at me in the street. A black crow sits in a pink magnolia
tree, cawing as orgone accumulates & discharges in a split
second over the city...summer begins. I may be your
lover...but I spit on your Millenium.

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #5

"Intellectual S/M Is the Fascism of the Eighties--The Avant-
Garde Eats Shit and Likes It"

COMRADES!

Recently some confusion about "Chaos" has plagued the A.O.A.
from certain revanchist quarters, forcing us (who despise
polemics) at last to indulge in a Plenary Session devoted to
denunciations _ex_cathedra_, portentous as hell; our faces
burn red with rhetoric, spit flies from our lips, neck veins
bulge with pulpit fervor. We must at last descend to flying
banners with angry slogans (in 1930's type faces) declaring
what Ontological Anarchy _is_not_.

Remember, only in Classical Physics does Chaos have anything
to do with entropy, heat-death, or decay. In our physics
(Chaos Theory), Chaos identifies with tao, beyond both yin-
as-entropy & yang-as-energy, more a principle of continual
creation than of any _nihil_, void in the sense of
_potentia_, not exhaustion. (Chaos as the "sum of all
orders.")

From this alchemy we quintessentialize an aesthetic theory.
Chaote art may act terrifying, it may even act
_grand_guignol_, but it can never allow itself to be
drenched in putrid negativity, thanatosis, _schadenfreude_
(delight in the misery of others), crooning over Nazi
memorabilia & serial murders. Ontological Anarchy collects
no snuff films & is bored to tears with dominatrices who
spout french philosophy. ("Everything is hopeless & I knew
it before you did, asshole. Nyahh!")

Wilhelm Reich was driven half mad & killed by agents of the
Emotional Plague; maybe half his work derived from sheer
paranoia (UFO conspiracies, homophobia, even his orgasm
theory), BUT on one point we agree wholeheartedly--_sexpol_:
sexual repression breeds death obsession, which leads to
_bad_politics_. A great deal of avant-garde Art is saturated
with Deadly Orgone Rays (DOR). Ontological Anarchy aims to
build aesthetic cloud-busters (OR-guns) to disperse the
miasma of cerebral sado-masochism which now passes for
slick, hip, new, fashionable. Self-mutilating "performance"
artists strike us as banal & stupid--their art makes
everyone _more_unhappy_. What kind of two-bit conniving
horseshit...what kind of cockroach-brained Art creeps cooked
up this apocalypse stew?

Of course the avant-garde seems "smart"--so did Marinetti &
the Futurists, so did Pound & Celine. Compared to that kind
of intelligence we'd choose real stupidity, bucolic New Age
blissed-out inanity--we'd rather be pinheads than
_queer_for_death_. But luckily we don't have to scoop out
our brains to attain our own queer brand of satori. All the
faculties, all the senses belong to us as our property--both
heart & head, intellect & spirit, body & soul. Ours is no
art of mutilation but of excess, superabundance, amazement.

The purveyors of pointless gloom are the Death Squads of
contemporary aesthetics--& we are the "disappeared ones."
Their make-believe ballroom of occult 3rd-Reich bric-a-brac
& child murder attracts the manipulators of the Spectacle--
death looks better on TV than life--& we Chaotes, who preach
an insurrectionary joy, are edged out towards silence.

Needless to say we reject all censorship by Church & State--
but "after the revolution" we would be willing to take
individual & personal responsibility for burning all the
Death Squad snuff-art crap & running them out of town on a
rail. (Criticism becomes _direct_action_ in an anarchist
context.) _My_ space has room neither for Jesus & his lords
of the flies nor for Chas. Manson & his literary admirers. I
want no mundane police--I want no cosmic axe-murderers
either; no TV chainsaw massacres, no sensitive
poststructuralist novels about necrophilia.

As it happens, the A.O.A. can scarcely hope to sabotage the
suffocating mechanisms of the State & its ghostly circuitry-
-but we just _might_ happen to find ourselves in a position
to do something about lesser manifestations of the DOR
plague such as the Corpse-Eaters of the Lower East Side &
other Art scum. We support artists who use _terrifying_
material in some "higher cause"--who use loving/sexual
material of any kind, however shocking or illegal--who _use_
their anger & disgust & their true desires to lurch toward
self-realization & beauty & adventure. "Social Nihilism,"
yes--but not the dead nihilism of gnostic self-disgust. Even
if it's violent & abrasive, anyone with a vestigial 3rd eye
can _see_ the differences between revolutionary pro-life art
& reactionary pro-death art. DOR stinks, & the chaote nose
can sniff it out--just as it knows the perfume of
spiritual/sexual joy, however buried or masked by other
darker scents. Even the Radical Right, for all its horror of
flesh & the senses, occasionally comes up with a moment of
perception & consciousness-enhancement--but the Death
Squads, for all their tired lip service to fashionable
revolutionary abstractions, offer us about as much true
libertarian energy as the FBI, FDA, or the double-dip
Baptists.

We live in a society which advertises its costliest
commodities with images of death & mutilation, beaming them
direct to the reptilian back-brain of the millions thru
alpha-wave-generating carcinogenic reality-warping devices--
while certain images of life (such as our favorite, a child
masturbating) are banned & punished with incredible
ferocity. It takes no guts at all to be an Art Sadist, for
salacious death lies at the aesthetic center of our
Consensus Paradigm. "Leftists" who like to dress up & play
Police-&-Victim, people who jerk off to atrocity photos,
people who like to _think_ & intellectualize about splatter
art & highfalutin hopelessness & groovy ghoulishness &
_other_people's_misery_--such "artists" are nothing but
police-without-power (a perfect definition for many
"revolutionaries" too). We have a black bomb for these
aesthetic fascists--it explodes with sperm & firecrackers,
raucous weeds & piracy, weird Shiite heresies & bubbling
paradise-fountains, complex rhythms, pulsations of life, all
shapeless & exquisite.

Wake up! Breathe! Feel the world's breath against your skin!
Seize the day! Breathe! Breathe!
(Thanx to J. Mander's
_Four_Arguments_for_the_Abolition_of_Television_; Adam Exit;
& the Moorish Cosmopolitan of Williamsburg)

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #6

I. Salon Apocalypse: "Secret Theater"

AS LONG AS NO Stalin breathes down our necks, why not make
_some_ art in the service of...an insurrection?

Never mind if it's "impossible." What else can we hope to
attain but the "impossible"? Should we wait for
_someone_else_ to reveal our true desires?

If art has died, or the audience has withered away, then we
find ourselves free of two dead weights. Potentially,
everyone is now some kind of artist--& potentially every
audience has regained its innocence, its ability to _become_
the art that it experiences.

Provided we can escape from the museums we carry around
inside us, provided we can stop selling ourselves tickets to
the galleries in our own skulls, we can begin to contemplate
an art which re-creates the goal of the sorcerer: changing
the structure of reality by the manipulation of living
symbols (in this case, the images we've been "given" by the
organizers of this salon--murder, war, famine, & greed).

We might now contemplate aesthetic actions which possess
some of the resonance of terrorism (or "cruelty," as Artaud
put it) aimed at the destruction of abstractions rather than
people, at liberation rather than power, pleasure rather
than profit, joy rather than fear. "Poetic Terrorism."
Our chosen images have the potency of darkness--but all
images are masks, & behind these masks lie energies we can
turn toward light & pleasure.

For example, the man who invented _aikido_ was a samurai who
became a pacifist & refused to fight for Japanese
imperialism. He became a hermit, lived on a mountain sitting
under a tree..
One day a former fellow-officer came to visit him & accused
him of betrayal, cowardice, etc. The hermit said nothing,
but kept on sitting--& the officer fell into a rage, drew
his sword, & struck. Spontaneously the unarmed master
disarmed the officer & returned his sword. Again & again the
officer tried to kill, using every subtle _kata_ in his
repertoire--but out of his empty mind the hermit each time
invented a new way to disarm him.

The officer of course became his first disciple. Later, they
learned how to _dodge_bullets_.
We might contemplate some form of metadrama meant to capture
a taste of this performance, which gave rise to a wholly new
art, a totally non-violent way of fighting--war without
murder, "the sword of life" rather than death.

A conspiracy of artists, anonymous as any mad bombers, but
aimed toward an act of gratuitous generosity rather than
violence--at the millennium rather than the apocalypse--or
rather, aimed at a _present_moment_ of aesthetic shock in
the service of realization & liberation.

Art tells gorgeous lies that come true.

Is it possible to create a SECRET THEATER in which both
artist & audience have completely disappeared--only to re-
appear on another plane, where life & art have become the
same thing, the pure giving of gifts?

(Note: The "Salon Apocalypse" was organized by Sharon Gannon
in July, 1986.)

II. Murder--War--Famine--Greed

THE MANICHEES & CATHARS believed that the body can be
spiritualized--or rather, that the body merely contaminates
pure spirit & must be utterly rejected. The Gnostic
_perfecti_ (radical dualists) starved themselves to death to
escape the body & return to the pleroma of pure light.
So: to evade the evils of the flesh--murder, war, famine,
greed--paradoxically only one path remains: murder of one's
own body, war on the flesh, famine unto death, greed for
salvation.
The radical monists however (Ismailis, Ranters, Antinomians)
consider that body & spirit are one, that the same spirit
which pervades a black stone also infuses the flesh with its
light; that all lives & all is life. "Things are what they
are spontaneously...everything is natural...all in motion as
if there were a True Lord to move them--but if we seek for
evidence of this lord we fail to find any." (Kuo Hsiang)

Paradoxically, the monist path also cannot be followed
without some sort of "murder, war, famine, greed": the
transformation of death into life (food, negentropy)--war
against the Empire of Lies--"fasting of the soul," or
renunciation of the Lie, of all that is not life--& greed
for life itself, the absolute power of desire.

Even more: without knowledge of the darkness ("carnal
knowledge") there can exist no knowledge of the light
("gnosis"). The two knowledges are not merely complementary:
say rather _identical_, like the same note played in
different octaves. Heraclitus claims that reality persists
in a state of "war." Only clashing notes can make harmony.
("Chaos is the sum of all orders.")
Give each of these four terms a different mask of language
(to call the Furies "The Kindly Ones" is not mere euphemism
but a way of uncovering _yet_more_meaning_). Masked,
ritualized, realized as art, the terms take on their dark
beauty, their "Black Light."

Instead of murder say _the_hunt_, the pure paleolithic
economy of all archaic and non-authoritarian tribal society-
-"venery," both the killing & eating of flesh & the way of
Venus, of desire. Instead of war say _insurrection_, not the
revolution of classes & powers but of the eternal rebel, the
dark one who uncovers light. Instead of greed say
_yearning_, unconquerable desire, mad love. And then instead
of famine, which is a kind of mutilation, speak of
wholeness, plenty, superabundance, generosity of the self
which spirals outward toward the Other.

Without this dance of masks, nothing will be created. The
oldest mythology makes Eros the firstborn of Chaos. Eros,
the wild one who tames, is the door through which the artist
returns to Chaos, the One, and then re-returns, comes back
again, bearing one of the patterns of beauty. The artist,
the hunter, the warrior: one who is both passionate and
balanced, both greedy & altruistic to the utmost extreme. We
must be saved from all salvations which save us from
ourselves, from our _animal_ which is also our _anima_, our
very lifeforce, as well as our _animus_, our animating self-
empowerment, which may even manifest as anger & greed.
BABYLON has told us that our flesh is filth--with this
device & the promise of salvation it enslaved us. But--if
the flesh is already "saved," already _light_--if even
consciousness itself is a kind of flesh, a palpable &
simultaneous living aether--then we need no power to
intercede for us. The wilderness, as Omar says, is paradise
_even_now_.

The true proprietorship of _murder_ lies with the Empire,
for only freedom is complete life. _War_ is Babylonian as
well--no free person will die for another's aggrandizement.
_Famine_ comes into existence _only_ with the civilization
of the saviors, the priest-kings--wasn't it Joseph who
taught Pharaoh to speculate in grain futures? _Greed_--for
land, for symbolic wealth, for power to deform others' souls
& bodies for their own _salvation_--greed too arises not
from "Nature nature-ing," but from the damming up &
canalization of all energies for the Empire's Glory.
Against all this, the artist possesses the dance of masks,
the total radicalization of language, the invention of a
"Poetic Terrorism" which will strike not at living beings
but at malign _ideas_, dead-weights on the coffin-lid of our
desires. The architecture of suffocation and paralysis will
be _blown_up_ only by our total celebration of everything--
even darkness.

--Summer Solstice, 1986

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #7

Psychic Paleolithism & High Technology: A Position Paper

JUST BECAUSE THE A.O.A. talks about "Paleolithism" all the
time, don't get the idea we intend to bomb ourselves back to
the Stone Age.

We have no interest in going "back to the land" if the deal
includes the boring life of a shit-kicking peasant--nor do
we want "tribalism" if it comes with taboos, fetishes &
malnutrition. We have no quarrel with the concept of
_culture_--including _technology_; for us the problem begins
with _civilization_.

What we like about Paleolithic life has been summed up by
the Peoples-Without-Authority School of anthropology: the
elegant laziness of hunter/gatherer society, the 2-hour
workday, the obsession with art, dance, poetry &
amorousness, the "democratization of shamanism," the
cultivation of perception--in short, culture.

What we dislike about civilization can be deduced from the
following progression: the "Agricultural Revolution"; the
emergence of caste; the City & its cult of hieratic control
("Babylon"); slavery; dogma; imperialism ("Rome"). The
suppression of sexuality in "work" under the aegis of
"authority." "The Empire never ended."

A _psychic_paleolithism_ based on High-Tech--post-
agricultural, post-industrial, "Zerowork," nomadic (or
"Rootless Cosmopolitan")--a Quantum Paradigm Society--this
constitutes the ideal vision of the future according to
Chaos Theory as well as "Futurology" (in the Robert Anton
Wilson-T. Leary sense of the term).

As for the present: we reject all collaboration with the
Civilization of Anorexia & Bulimia, with people so ashamed
of never suffering that they invent hair shirts for
themselves & others--or those who gorge without compassion &
then spew the vomit of their suppressed guilt in great
masochistic bouts of jogging & dieting. All _our_ pleasures
& self-disciplines belong to us by Nature--we never deny
ourselves, we never give up anything; but some things have
given up on us & left us, because we are too large for them.
I am both caveman & starfaring mutant, con-man & free
prince. Once an Indian Chief was invited to the White House
for a banquet. As the food passed round, the Chief heaped
his plate to the max, not once but three times. At last the
honky sitting next to him says, "Chief, heh-heh, don't you
think that's a little too much?" "Ugh," the Chief replies,
"little too much _just_right_ for Chief!"

Nevertheless, certain doctrines of "Futurology" remain
problematic. For example, even if we accept the liberatory
potential of such new technologies as TV, computers,
robotics, Space exploration, etc., we still see a gap
between potentiality & actualization. The banalization of
TV, the yuppification of computers & the militarization of
Space suggest that these technologies in themselves provide
no "determined" guarantee of their liberatory use.

Even if we reject the Nuclear Holocaust as just another
Spectacular Diversion orchestrated to distract our attention
from _real_ problems, we must still admit that "Mutual
Assured Destruction" & "Pure War" tend to dampen our
enthusiasm for certain aspects of the High-Tech Adventure.
Ontological Anarchy retains its affection for Luddism as a
tactic: if a given technology, no matter how admirable
_in_potentia_ (in the future), is used to oppress me here &
now, then I must either wield the weapon of sabotage or else
seize the means of production (or perhaps more importantly
the means of _communication_). There is no humanity without
_techne_--but there is no _techne_ worth more than my
humanity.

We spurn knee-jerk anti-Tech anarchism--for ourselves, at
least (there exist some who enjoy farming, or so one hears)-
-and we reject the concept of the Technological Fix as well.
For us all forms of determinism appear equally vapid--we're
slaves of neither our genes nor our machines. What is
"natural" is what we _imagine_&_create_. "Nature has no Laws-
-only habits."

Life for us belongs neither to the Past--that land of famous
ghosts hoarding their tarnished grave-
goods--nor to the Future, whose bulbbrained mutant citizens
guard so jealously the secrets of immortality, faster-than-
light flight, designer genes & the withering of the State.
_Aut_nunc_aut_nihil_. Each moment contains an eternity to be
penetrated--yet we lose ourselves in visions seen through
corpses' eyes, or in nostalgia for unborn perfections.

The attainments of my ancestors & descendants are nothing
more to me than an instructive or amusing tale--I will never
call them my betters, even to excuse my own smallness. I
print for myself a license to steal from them whatever I
need--psychic paleolithism or high-tech--or for that matter
the gorgeous detritus of civilization itself, secrets of the
Hidden Masters, pleasures of frivolous nobility &
_la_vie_boheme_.

_La_decadence_, Nietzsche to the contrary notwithstanding,
plays as deep a role in Ontological Anarchy as health--we
take what we want of each. Decadent aesthetes do not wage
stupid wars nor submerge their consciousness in
microcephalic greed & resentment. They seek adventure in
artistic innovation & non-ordinary sexuality rather than in
the misery of others. The A.O.A. admires & emulates their
sloth, their disdain for the stupidity of normalcy, their
expropriation of aristocratic sensibilities. For us these
qualities harmonize paradoxically with those of the Old
Stone Age & its overflowing health, ignorance of hierarchy,
cultivation of _virtu_ rather than _Law_. We demand
decadence without sickness, & health without boredom!

Thus the A.O.A. gives unqualified support to all indigenous
& tribal peoples in their struggle for complete autonomy--&
at the same time, to the wildest, most Spaced-out
speculations & demands of the Futurologists. The
paleolithism of the future (which for us, as mutants,
already exists) will be achieved on a grand scale only
through a massive technology of the Imagination, and a
scientific paradigm which reaches beyond Quantum Mechanics
into the realm of Chaos Theory & the hallucinations of
Speculative Fiction.

As Rootless Cosmopolitans we lay claim to all the beauties
of the past, of the orient, of tribal societies--all this
must & can be ours, even the treasuries of the Empire: ours
to share. And at the same time we demand a technology which
transcends agriculture, industry, even the simultaneity of
electricity, a hardware that intersects with the wetware of
consciousness, that embraces the power of quarks, of
particles travelling backward in time, of quasars & parallel
universes.

The squabbling ideologues of anarchism & libertarianism each
prescribe some utopia congenial to their various brands of
tunnel-vision, ranging from the peasant commune to the L-5
Space City. We say, let a thousand flowers bloom--with no
gardener to lop off weeds & sports according to some
moralizing or eugenical scheme. The only true conflict is
that between the authority of the tyrant & the authority of
the realized self--all else is illusion, psychological
projection, wasted verbiage.

In one sense the sons & daughters of Gaia have never left
the paleolithic; in another sense, all the perfections of
the future are already ours. Only insurrection will "solve"
this paradox--only the uprising against false consciousness
in both ourselves & others will sweep away the technology of
oppression & the poverty of the Spectacle. In this battle a
painted mask or shaman's rattle may prove as vital as the
seizing of a communications satellite or secret computer
network.

Our sole criterion for judging a weapon or a tool is its
beauty. The means already _are_ the end, in a certain sense;
the insurrection already _is_ our adventure; Becoming IS
Being. Past & future exist within us & for us, alpha &
omega. There are no other gods before or after us. We are
free in TIME--and will be free in SPACE as well.

(Thanx to Hagbard Celine the Sage of Howth & Environs)

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #8

Chaos Theory & the Nuclear Family

SUNDAY IN RIVERSIDE PARK the Fathers fix their sons in
place, nailing them magically to the grass with baleful
ensorcelling stares of milky camaraderie, & force them to
throw baseballs back & forth for hours. The boys almost
appear to be small St Sebastians pierced by arrows of
boredom.

The smug rituals of family fun turn each humid Summer meadow
into a Theme Park, each son an unwitting allegory of
Father's wealth, a pale representation 2 or 3 times removed
from reality: the Child as metaphor of Something-or-other.

And here I come as dusk gathers, stoned on mushroom dust,
half convinced that these hundreds of fireflies arise from
my own consciousness--Where have they been all these years?
why so many so suddenly?--each rising in the moment of its
incandescence, describing quick arcs like abstract graphs of
the energy in sperm.

"Families! misers of love! How I hate them!" Baseballs fly
aimlessly in vesper light, catches are missed, voices rise
in peevish exhaustion. The children feel sunset encrusting
the last few hours of doled-out freedom, but still the
Fathers insist on stretching the tepid postlude of their
patriarchal sacrifice till dinnertime, till shadows eat the
grass.

Among these sons of the gentry one locks gazes with me for a
moment--I transmit telepathically the image of sweet
license, the smell of TIME unlocked from all grids of
school, music lessons, summer camps, family evenings round
the tube, Sundays in the Park with Dad--authentic time,
chaotic time.

Now the family is leaving the Park, a little platoon of
dissatisfaction. But _that_one_ turns & smiles back at me in
complicity--"Message Received"--& dances away after a
firefly, buoyed up by my desire. The Father barks a mantra
which dissipates my power.

The moment passes. The boy is swallowed up in the pattern of
the week--vanishes like a bare-legged pirate or Indian taken
prisoner by missionaries. The Park knows who I am, it stirs
under me like a giant jaguar about to wake for nocturnal
meditation. Sadness still holds it back, but it remains
untamed in its deepest essence: an exquisite disorder at the
heart of the city's night.

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #9

Double-Dip Denunciations

I. Xtianity

AGAIN & AGAIN WE hope that attitudinizing corpse has finally
breathed its last rancorous sigh & floated off to its final
pumpkinification. Again & again we imagine the defeat of
that obscene flayed death-trip bogey nailed to the walls of
all our waiting rooms, never again to whine at us for our
sins...

but again & again it resurrects itself & comes creeping back
to haunt us like the villain of some _n_th rate snuff-porn
splatter film--the thousandth re-make of
_Night_of_the_Living_Dead_--trailing its snail-track of
whimpering humiliation...just when you thought it was safe
in the unconscious...it's JAWS for JESUS. Look out! Hardcore
Chainsaw Baptists!

and the Leftists, nostalgic for the Omega Point of their
dialectical paradise, welcome each galvanized revival of the
putrescent creed with coos of delight: Let's dance the tango
with all those marxist bishops from Latin America--croon a
ballad for the pious Polish dockworkers--hum spirituals for
the latest afro-Methodist presidential hopeful from the
Bible Belt...

The A.O.A. denounces Liberation Theology as a conspiracy of
stalinist nuns--the Whore of Babylon's secret scarlet deal
with red fascism in the tropics. _Solidarnosc?_ The Pope's
Own Labor Union--backed by the AFL/CIO, the Vatican Bank,
the Freemason Lodge Propaganda Due, and the Mafia. And if we
ever voted we'd never waste that empty gesture on some Xtian
dog, no matter what its breed or color.

As for the _real_ Xtians, those bored-again self-lobotomized
bigots, those Mormon babykillers, those Star Warriors of the
Slave Morality, televangelist blackshirts, zombie squads of
the Blessed Virgin Mary (who hovers in a pink cloud over the
Bronx spewing hatred, anathema, roses of vomit on the
sexuality of children, pregnant teenagers & queers)...

As for the genuine death-cultists, ritual cannibals,
Armageddon-freaks--the Xtian Right--we can only pray that
the RAPTURE WILL COME & snatch them all up from behind the
steering wheels of their cars, from their lukewarm game
shows & chaste beds, take them all up into heaven & let _us_
get on with _human_life_.

II. Abortionists & Anti-abortionists

REDNECKS WHO BOMB ABORTION clinics belong in the same
grotesque category of vicious stupidity as bishops who
prattle Peace & yet condemn all human sexuality. Nature has
no laws ("only habits"), & all law is unnatural.
_Everything_ belongs to the sphere of personal/imaginal
morality--even murder.

However, according to Chaos Theory, it does not follow that
we are obliged to like & approve of murder--or abortion.
Chaos would enjoy seeing every bastard love-child carried to
term & birthed; sperm & egg alone are mere lovely
secretions, but combined as DNA they become potential
consciousness, negentropy, joy.

If "meat is murder!" as the Vegans like to claim, what pray
tell is abortion? Those totemists who danced to the animals
they hunted, who meditated to become one with their living
food & share its tragedy, demonstrated values far more
humane than the average claque of "pro-Choice" feminoid
liberals.

In every single "issue" cooked up for "debate" in the
patternbook of the Spectacle, _both_sides_ are invariably
full of shit. The "abortion issue" is no exception..

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #10

Plenary Session Issues New Denunciations--Purges Expected

TO OFFSET ANY STICKY karma we might have acquired thru our
pulpit-thumping sermonette against Xtians & other end-of-the-
world creeps (see last ish) & just to set the record
straight: the A.O.A. also denounces all born-again knee-jerk
_atheists_ & their frowsy late-Victorian luggage of
scientistic vulgar materialism. ///// We applaud all anti-
Xtian sentiment, of course--& all attacks on _all_ organized
religions. But...to hear some anarchists talk you'd think
the sixties never happened and no one ever dropped LSD.
///// As for the scientists themselves, the Alice-like
madnesses of Quantum & Chaos Theory have driven the best of
them towards taoism & vedanta (not to mention dada)--& yet
if you read _The_Match_ or _Freedom_ you might imagine
science was embalmed with Prince Kropotkin--& "religion"
with Bishop Ussher. ///// Of course one despises the
Aquarian brownshirts, the kind of gurus lauded recently in
the _New_York_Times_ for their contributions to Big
Business, the franchise-granting yuppie zombie cults, the
anorexic metaphysics of New Age banality...but OUR
esotericism remains undefiled by these mediocre money-
changers & their braindead minions. ///// The heretics &
antinomian mystics of Orient & Occident have developed
systems based on _inner_liberation_. Some of these systems
are tainted with religious mysticism & even social reaction-
-others seem more purely radical or "psychological"--& some
even crystallize into revolutionary movements (millenarian
Levellers, Assassins, Yellow Turban Taoists, etc.) Whatever
their flaws they possess certain magical weapons which
anarchism sorely lacks: (1) A sense of the _meta-rational_
("metanoia"), ways to go beyond laminated thinking into
smooth (or nomadic or "chaotic") thinking & perception; (2)
an actual definition of self-realized or liberated
consciousness, a positive description of its structure, &
techniques for approaching it; (3) a coherent archetypal
view of epistemology--that is, a way of knowing (about
history, for example) that utilizes hermeneutic
phenomenology to uncover patterns of _meaning_ (something
like the Surrealists' "Paranoia Criticism"); (4) a teaching
on sexuality (in the "tantrik" aspects of various Paths)
that assigns value to pleasure rather than self-denial, not
only for its own sake but as a vehicle of enhanced awareness
or "liberation"; (5) an attitude of celebration, what might
be called a "Jubilee concept," a cancelling of psychic debt
thru some inherent generosity in reality itself; (6) a
_language_ (including gesture, ritual, intentionality) with
which to animate & communicate these five aspects of
cognition; and (7) a silence. ///// It's no surprise to
discover how many anarchists are ex-Catholics, defrocked
priests or nuns, former altar boys, lapsed born-again
baptists or even ex-Shiite fanatics. Anarchism offers up a
black (& red) Mass to de-ritualize all spook-haunted brains-
-a secular exorcism--but then betrays itself by cobbling
together a High Church of its own, all cobwebby with Ethical
Humanism, Free Thought, Muscular Atheism, & crude
Fundamentalist Cartesian Logic. ///// Two decades ago we
began the project of becoming Rootless Cosmopolitans,
determined to sift the detritus of all tribes, cultures &
civilizations (including our own) for viable fragments--& to
synthesize from this mess of potsherds a living system of
our own--lest (as Blake warned) we become slaves to someone
else's. ///// If some Javanese sorcerer or Native American
shaman possesses some precious fragment I need for my own
"medicine pouch," should I sneer & quote Bakunin's line
about stringing up priests with bankers' guts? or should I
remember that anarchy knows no dogma, that Chaos cannot be
mapped--& help myself to anything not nailed down? ///// The
earliest definitions of anarchy are found in the
_Chuang_Tzu_ & other taoist texts; "mystical anarchism"
boasts a hoarier pedigree than the Greco-Rationalist
variety. When Nietzsche spoke of the "Hyperboreans" I think
he foretold _us_, who have gone beyond the death of God--&
the rebirth of the Goddess--to a realm where spirit & matter
are one. Every manifestation of that hierogamy, every
material thing & every life, becomes not only "sacred" in
itself but also symbolic of its own "divine essence." /////
Atheism is nothing but the opiate of The Masses (or rather,
their self-chosen champions)--& not a very colorful or sexy
drug. If we are to follow Baudelaire's advice & "be always
intoxicated," the A.O.A. would prefer something more like
mushrooms, thank you. Chaos is the oldest of the gods--&
Chaos never died.

*  *  *  *  *

COMMUNIQUE #11

Special Holiday Season Food Issue Rant: Turn Off the Lite!

THE ASSOCIATION FOR ONTOLOGICAL ANARCHY calls for a boycott
of all products marketed under the Shibboleth of LITE--beer,
meat, lo-cal candy, cosmetics, music, pre-packaged
"lifestyles," whatever.

The concept of LITE (in Situ-jargon) unfolds a complex of
symbolism by which the Spectacle hopes to recuperate all
revulsion against its commodification of desire. "Natural,"
"organic," "healthy" produce is designed for a market sector
of mildly dissatisfied consumers with mild cases of future-
shock & mild yearnings for a tepid authenticity. A niche has
been prepared for _you_, softly illumined with the illusions
of simplicity, cleanliness, thinness, a dash of asceticism &
self-denial. Of course, it costs a little more...after all,
LITEness was not designed for poor hungry primitivos who
still think of food as nourishment rather than decor. It
_has_ to cost more--otherwise _you_ wouldn't buy it.

The American Middle Class (don't quibble; you know what I
mean) falls naturally into opposite but complementary
factions: the Armies of Anorexia & Bulimia. Clinical cases
of these diseases represent only the psychosomatic froth on
a wave of cultural pathology, deep, diffused & largely
unconscious. The Bulimics are those yupped-out gentry who
gorge on margharitas & VCRs, then purge on LITE food,
jogging, or (an)aerobic jiggling. The Anorexics are the
"lifestyle" rebels, ultra-food-faddists, eaters of algae,
joyless, dispirited & wan--but smug in their puritanical
zeal & their designer hair-shirts. Grotesque junk food
simply represents the flip-side of ghoulish "health food":--
nothing tastes like anything but woodchips or additives--
it's all either boring or carcinogenic--or both--& it's all
incredibly _stupid_.

Food, cooked or raw, cannot escape from symbolism. It _is_,
& also simultaneously _represents_ that which it is. All
food is soul food; to treat it otherwise is to court
indigestion, both chronic & metaphysical.

But in the airless vault of our civilization, where nearly
every experience is mediated, where reality is strained
through the deadening mesh of consensus-perception, we lose
touch with food as _nourishment_; we begin to construct for
ourselves personae based on what we consume, treating
_products_ as projections of our yearning for the authentic.

The A.O.A. sometimes envisions CHAOS as a cornucopia of
continual creation, as a sort of geyser of cosmic
generosity; therefore we refrain from advocating any
specific diet, lest we offend against the Sacred
Multiplicity & the Divine Subjectivity. We're not about to
hawk you yet another New Age prescription for perfect health
(only the dead are perfectly healthy); we interest ourselves
in _life_, not "lifestyles."

True lightness we adore, & rich heaviness delights us in its
season. Excess suits us to perfection, moderation pleases
us, & we have learned that hunger can be the finest of all
spices. Everything _is_ light, & the lushest flowers grow
round the privy. We dream of phalanstery tables & bolo'bolo
cafes where every festive collective of diners will share
the individual genius of a Brillat-Savarin (that saint of
taste).

Shaykh Abu Sa'id never saved money or even kept it overnight-
-therefore, whenever some patron donated a heavy purse to
his hospice, the dervishes celebrated with a gourmet feast;
& on other days, all went hungry. The point was to enjoy
both states, full & empty...

LITE parodies spiritual emptiness & illumination, just as
McDonald's travesties the imagery of fullness & celebration.
The human spirit (not to mention _hunger_) can overcome &
transcend all this fetishism--joy can erupt even at Burger
King, & even LITE beer may hide a dose of Dionysus. But why
should we have to struggle against this garbagy tide of
cheap rip-off ticky-tack, when we could be drinking the wine
of paradise even now under our own vine & fig tree?

Food belongs to the realm of everyday life, the primary
arena for all insurrectionary self-empowerment, all
spiritual self-enhancement, all seizing-back of pleasure,
all revolt against the Planetary Work Machine & its
imitation desires. Far be it from us to dogmatize; the
Native American hunter might fuel his happiness with fried
squirrel, the anarcho-taoist with a handful of dried
apricots. Milarepa the Tibetan, after ten years of nettle-
soup, ate a butter cake & achieved enlightenment. The
dullard sees no _eros_ in fine champagne; the sorcerer can
fall intoxicated on a glass of water.

Our culture, choking on its own pollutants, cries out (like
the dying Goethe) for "More LITE!"--as if these
polyunsaturated effluents could somehow assuage our misery,
as if their bland weightless tasteless characterlessness
could protect us from the gathering dark.

No! This last illusion finally strikes us as too cruel. We
are forced against our own slothful inclinations to take a
stand & protest. Boycott! Boycott! TURN OFF THE LITE!

Appendix: Menu For An Anarchist Black Banquet (veg & non-
veg)

Caviar & blinis; Hundred year old eggs; Squid & rice cooked
in ink; Eggplants cooked in their skins with black pickled
garlic; Wild rice with black walnuts & black mushrooms;
Truffles in black butter; Venison marinated in port,
charcoal grilled, served on pumpernickel slices & garnished
with roast chestnuts. Black Russians; Guiness-&-champagne;
Chinese black tea. Dark chocolate mousse, Turkish coffee,
black grapes, plums, cherries, etc.

*  *  *  *  *

SPECIAL HALLOWEEN COMMUNIQUE

Black Magic as Revolutionary Action

PREPARE AN INK OF pure & genuine saffron mixed with rose-
water, adding if possible some blood from a black rooster.
In a quiet room furnish an altar with a bowl of the ink, a
pen with an iron nib, 7 black candles, an incense burner, &
some benzoin. The charm may be written on virgin paper or
parchment. Draw the diagram at 4 p.m. on a Wednesday, facing
North. Copy the 7-headed diagram (see illustration) without
lifting the pen from the paper, in one smooth operation,
holding your breath & pressing your tongue to the roof of
your mouth. This is the _Barisan_Laksamana_, or King of the
Djinn. Then draw the Solomon's Seal (a star representing a 5-
headed djinn) & other parts of the diagram. Above Solomon's
Seal write the name of the individual or institution to be
cursed. Now hold the paper in the benzoin fumes, & invoke
the white & black djinn _within_yourself_:

Bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim
as-salaam alikum
O White Djinn, Radiance of Mohammad
king of all spirits within me
O Black Djinn, shadow of myself
AWAY, destroy my enemy
--and if you do not
then be considered a traitor to Allah
--by virtue of the charm
La illaha ill'Allah

Mohammad ar-Rasul Allah

If the curse is to be aimed at an individual oppressor, a
wax doll may be prepared & the charm inserted (see
illustration).

Seven needles are then driven downward into the top of the
head, thru the left & right armpits, left & right hips, &
thru the lips or nostrils. Wrap the doll in a white shroud &
bury it in the ground where the enemy is sure to walk over
it, meanwhile enlisting the aid of local earth spirits:

Bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim
O Earth Djinn, Dirt-spirit
O Black Djinn living underground
listen, vampire of the soil
I order you to mark & destroy
the body & soul of _____________
Heed my orders
for I am the true & original sorcerer
by virtue of the charm
la illaha ill'Allah

Mohammad ar-Rasul Allah

If however the curse is intended for an institution or
company, assemble the following items: a hard-boiled egg, an
iron nail, & 3 iron pins (stick nail & needles into egg);
dried scorpion, lizard &/or beetles; a small chamois bag
containing graveyard dirt, magnetized iron fillings,
asafoetida & sulphur, & tied with a red ribbon. Sew the
charm into yellow silk & seal it with red wax. Place all
these things in a wide-necked bottle, cork it, & seal it
with wax.

The bottle may now be carefully packaged & sent by mail to
the target institution--for example a Xtian televangelist
show, the _New_York_Post_, the MUZAK company, a school or
college--along with a copy of the following statement (extra
copies may be mailed to individual employees, &/or posted
surreptitiously around the premises):

Malay Black Djinn Curse

_These_premises_have_been_cursed_by_black_sorcery._The_curse
_has_been_activated_according_to_correct_rituals._This_insti
tution_is_cursed_because_it_has_oppressed_the_Imagination_&_
defiled_the_Intellect,_degraded_the_arts_toward_stupefaction
,_spiritual_slavery,_propaganda_for_State_&_Capital,_puritan
ical_reaction,_unjust_profits,_lies_&_aesthetic_blight_.
_The_employees_of_this_institution_are_now_in_danger._No_ind
ividual_has_been_cursed,_but_the_place_itself_has_been_infec
ted_with_ill_fortune_&_malignancy._Those_who_do_not_wake_up_
&_quit,_or_begin_sabotaging_the_workplace,_will_gradually_fa
ll_under_the_effect_of_this_sorcery._Removing_or_destroying_
the_implement_of_sorcery_will_do_no_good._It_has_been_seen_i
n_this_place,_&_this_place_is_cursed._Reclaim_your_humanity_
&_revolt_in_the_name_of_the_Imagination--
_or_else_be_judged_(in_the_mirror_of_this_charm)_an_enemy_of
_the_human_race_.

We suggest "taking credit" for this action in the name of
some other offensive cultural institution, such as the
American Poetry Society or the Women's Anti-Porn Crusade
(give full address).
We also suggest, in order to counter-balance the effect on
yourself of calling up the personal black djinn, that you
send a _magical_blessing_ to someone or some group you love
&/or admire. Do this anonymously, & make the gift beautiful.
No precise ritual need be followed, but the imagery should
be allowed to spring from the well of consciousness in an
intuitive/spontaneous meditational state. Use sweet incense,
red & white candles, hard candy, wine, flowers, etc. If
possible include real silver, gold, or jewels in the gift.

This how-to-do-it manual on the Malay Black Djinn Curse has
been prepared according to authentic & complete ritual by
the Cultural Terrorism Committee of the inner Adept Chamber
of the HMOCA ("Third Paradise"). We are Nizari-Ismaili
Esotericists; that is, Shiite heretics & fanatics who trace
our spiritual line to Hassan-i Sabbah through Aladdin
Mohammad III "the Madman," seventh & last Pir of Alamut (&
not through the line of the Aga Khans). We espouse radical
monism & pure antinomianism, & oppose _all_ forms of law &
authority, in the name of Chaos.

At present, for tactical reasons, we do not advocate
violence or sorcery against individuals. We call for actions
against _institutions_ & _ideas_--art-sabotage & clandestine
propaganda (including ceremonial magic & "tantrik
pornography")--and especially against the poisonous media of
the Empire of Lies. The Black Djinn Curse represents only a
first step in the campaign of Poetic Terrorism which--we
trust--will lead to other less subtle forms of insurrection.

*  *  *  *  *

SPECIAL COMMUNIQUE

A.O.A. Announces Purges in Chaos Movement

CHAOS THEORY MUST OF course flow _impurely_. "Lazy yokel
plows a crooked furrow." Any attempt to precipitate a
crystal of ideology would result in flawed rigidities,
fossilizations, armorings & drynesses which we would like to
renounce, along with all "purity." Yes, Chaos revels in a
certain abandoned formlessness not unlike the erotic
messiness of those we love for their shattering of habit &
their unveiling of mutability. Nevertheless this looseness
does not imply that Chaos Theory must accept every leech
that attempts to attach itself to our sacred membranes.
Certain definitions or deformations of Chaos deserve
denunciation, & our dedication to divine disorder need not
deter us from trashing the traitors & rip-off artists &
psychic vampires now buzzing around Chaos under the
impression that it's trendy. We propose not an Inquisition
in the name of _our_ definitions, but rather a duel, a
brawl, an act of violence or emotional repugnance, an
exorcism. First we'd like to define & even name our enemies.
(1) All those death-heads & mutilation artists who associate
Chaos exclusively with misery, negativity & a joyless pseudo-
libertinism--those who think "beyond good & evil" means
doing evil--the S/M intellectuals, crooners of the
apocalypse--the new Gnostic Dualists, world-haters & ugly
nihilists. (2) All those scientists selling Chaos either as
a force for destruction (e.g. particle-beam weapons) or as a
mechanism for enforcing order, as in the use of Chaos math
in statistical sociology and mob control. An attempt will be
made to discover names and addresses in this category. (3)
All those who appropriate Chaos in the cause of some New Age
scam. Of course _we_ have no objection to your giving us all
your money, but we'll tell you up front: we'll use it to buy
dope or fly to Morocco. You can't sell water by the river;
Chaos is that _materia_ of which the alchemists spoke, which
fools value more highly than gold even tho it may be found
on any dungheap. The chief enemy in this category is Werner
Erhardt, founder of _est_, who is now bottling "Chaos" &
trying to franchise it to the Yuppoids. Second, we will list
some of our friends, in order to give an idea of the
disparate trends in Chaos Theory we enjoy: Chaotica, the
imaginal autonomous zone discovered by Feral Faun (a.k.a.
Feral Ranter); the Academy of Chaotic Arts of Tundra Wind;
Joel Birnoco's magazine _KAOS_; _Chaos_Inc._, a newsletter
connected to the work of Ralph Abraham, a leading Chaos
scientist; the Church of Eris; Discordian Zen; the Moorish
Orthodox Church; certain clenches of the Church of the
SubGenius; the Sacred Jihad of Our Lady of Perpetual Chaos;
the writers associated with "type-3 anarchism" & journals
like _Popular_Reality_; etc. The battle lines are drawn.
Chaos is not entropy, Chaos is not death, Chaos is not a
commodity. Chaos is continual creation. Chaos never died.

*  *  *  *  *

POST-ANARCHISM ANARCHY

THE ASSOCIATION FOR ONTOLOGICAL ANARCHY gathers in conclave,
black turbans & shimmering robes, sprawled on shirazi
carpets sipping bitter coffee, smoking long chibouk & sibsi.
QUESTION: What's our position on all these recent defections
& desertions from anarchism (esp. in California-Land):
condemn or condone? Purge them or hail them as advance-
guard? Gnostic elite...or traitors?

Actually, we have a lot of sympathy for the deserters &
their various critiques of anarchISM. Like Sinbad & the
Horrible Old Man, anarchism staggers around with the corpse
of a Martyr magically stuck to its shoulders--haunted by the
legacy of failure & revolutionary masochism--stagnant
backwater of lost history.

Between tragic Past & impossible Future, anarchism seems to
lack a Present--as if afraid to ask itself, here & now, WHAT
ARE MY TRUE DESIRES?--& what can I DO before it's
_too_late_?...Yes, imagine yourself confronted by a sorcerer
who stares you down balefully & demands, "What is your True
Desire?" Do you hem & haw, stammer, take refuge in
ideological platitudes? Do you possess both Imagination &
Will, can you both dream & dare--or are you the dupe of an
impotent fantasy?

Look in the mirror & try it...(for one of your masks is the
face of a sorcerer)...

The anarchist "movement" today contains virtually no Blacks,
Hispanics, Native Americans or children...even tho
_in_theory_ such genuinely oppressed groups stand to gain
the most from any anti-authoritarian revolt. Might it be
that anarchISM offers no concrete program whereby the truly
deprived might fulfill (or at least struggle realistically
to fulfill) real needs & desires?

If so, then this failure would explain not only anarchism's
lack of appeal to the poor & marginal, but also the
disaffection & desertions from within its own ranks. Demos,
picket-lines & reprints of 19th century classics don't add
up to a vital, daring conspiracy of self-liberation. If the
movement is to grow rather than shrink, a lot of deadwood
will have to be jettisoned & some risky ideas embraced.

The potential exists. Any day now, vast numbers of americans
are going to realize they're being force-fed a load of
reactionary boring hysterical artificially-flavored _crap_.
Vast chorus of groans, puking & retching...angry mobs roam
the malls, smashing & looting...etc., etc. The Black Banner
could provide a focus for the outrage & channel it into an
insurrection of the Imagination. We could pick up the
struggle where it was dropped by Situationism in '68 &
Autonomia in the seventies, & carry it to the next stage. We
could have revolt in our times--& in the process, we could
realize many of our True Desires, even if only for a season,
a brief Pirate Utopia, a warped free-zone in the old
Space/Time continuum.

If the A.O.A. retains its affiliation with the "movement,"
we do so not merely out of a romantic predilection for lost
causes--or not entirely. Of all "political systems,"
anarchism (despite its flaws, & precisely because it is
neither political nor a system) comes closest to our
understanding of reality, ontology, the nature of being. As
for the deserters...we agree with their critiques, but note
that they seem to offer no new powerful alternatives. So for
the time being we prefer to concentrate on changing
anarchism from within. Here's our program, comrades:

1. Work on the realization that _psychic_racism_ has
replaced overt discrimination as one of the most disgusting
aspects of our society. Imaginative participation in other
cultures, esp. those we live with.

2. Abandon all ideological purity. Embrace "Type-3"
anarchism (to use Bob Black's pro-tem slogan): neither
collectivist nor individualist. Cleanse the temple of vain
idols, get rid of the Horrible Old Men, the relics &
martyrologies.

3. Anti-work or "Zerowork" movement extremely important,
including a radical & perhaps violent attack on Education &
the serfdom of children.

4. Develop american samizdat network, replace outdated
publishing/propaganda tactics.
Pornography & popular entertainment as vehicles for radical
re-education.

5. In music the hegemony of the 2/4 & 4/4 beat must be
overthrown. We need a new music, totally insane but life-
affirming, rhythmically subtle yet powerful, & we need it
NOW.

6. Anarchism must wean itself away from evangelical
materialism & banal 2-dimensional 19th century scientism.
"Higher states of consciousness" are not mere SPOOKS
invented by evil priests. The orient, the occult, the tribal
cultures possess _techniques_ which can be "appropriated" in
true anarchist fashion. Without "higher states of
consciousness," anarchism ends & dries itself up into a form
of misery, a whining complaint. We need a practical kind of
"mystical anarchism," devoid of all New Age shit-&-shinola,
& inexorably heretical & anti-clerical; avid for all new
technologies of consciousness & metanoia--a democratization
of shamanism, intoxicated & serene.

7. Sexuality is under assault, obviously from the Right,
more subtly from the avant-pseud "post-sexuality" movement,
& even more subtly by Spectacular Recuperation in media &
advertising. Time for a major step forward in SexPol
awareness, an explosive reaffirmation of the polymorphic
eros--(even & especially in the face of plague & gloom)--a
literal glorification of the senses, a doctrine of delight.
Abandon all world-hatred & shame.

8. Experiment with new tactics to replace the outdated
baggage of Leftism. Emphasize practical, material & personal
benefits of radical networking. The times do not appear
propitious for violence or militancy, but surely a bit of
sabotage & imaginative disruption is never out of place.
Plot & conspire, don't bitch & moan. The Art World in
particular deserves a dose of "Poetic Terrorism."

9. The despatialization of post-Industrial society provides
some benefits (e.g. computer networking) but can also
manifest as a form of oppression (homelessness,
gentrification, architectural depersonalization, the erasure
of Nature, etc.) The communes of the sixties tried to
circumvent these forces but failed. The question of _land_
refuses to go away. How can we separate the concept of
_space_ from the mechanisms of _control_? The territorial
gangsters, the Nation/States, have hogged the entire map.
Who can invent for us a cartography of autonomy, who can
draw a map that includes our desires?

AnarchISM ultimately implies anarchy--& anarchy is chaos.
Chaos is the principle of continual creation...&
_Chaos_never_died_.

--A.O.A. Plenary Session

March '87, NYC

*  *  *  *  *

BLACK CROWN & BLACK ROSE

Anarcho-Monarchism & Anarcho-Mysticism

IN SLEEP WE DREAM of only two forms of government--anarchy &
monarchy. Primordial root consciousness understands no
politics & never plays fair. A democratic dream? a socialist
dream? Impossible.

Whether my REMs bring verdical near-prophetic visions or
mere Viennese wish-fulfillment, only kings & wild people
populate my night. Monads & nomads.

Pallid day (when nothing shines by its own light) slinks &
insinuates & suggests that we compromise with a sad &
lackluster reality. But in dream we are never ruled except
by love or sorcery, which are the skills of chaotes &
sultans.

Among a people who cannot create or play, but can only
_work_, artists also know no choice but
anarchy & monarchy. Like the dreamer, they must possess &
_do_ possess their own perceptions, & for this they must
sacrifice the merely social to a "tyrannical Muse."
Art dies when treated "fairly." It must enjoy a caveman's
wildness or else have its mouth filled with gold by some
prince. Bureaucrats & sales personnel poison it, professors
chew it up, & philosophers spit it out. Art is a kind of
byzantine barbarity fit only for nobles & heathens.
If you had known the sweetness of life as a poet in the
reign of some venal, corrupt, decadent, ineffective &
ridiculous Pasha or Emir, some Qajar shah, some King Farouk,
some Queen of Persia, you would know that this is what every
anarchist must want. How they loved poems & paintings, those
dead luxurious fools, how they absorbed all roses & cool
breezes, tulips & lutes!
Hate their cruelty & caprice, yes--but at least they were
human. The bureaucrats, however, who smear the walls of the
mind with odorless filth--so kind, so _gemutlich_--who
pollute the inner air with numbness--they're not even worthy
of hate. They scarcely exist outside the bloodless Ideas
they serve.

And besides: the dreamer, the artist, the anarchist--do they
not share some tinge of cruel caprice with the most
outrageous of moghuls? Can genuine life occur without some
folly, some excess, some bouts of Heraclitan "strife"? We do
not rule--but we cannot & will not _be_ruled_.

In Russia the Narodnik-Anarchists would sometimes forge a
_ukase_ or manifesto in the name of the Czar; in it the
Autocrat would complain that greedy lords & unfeeling
officials had sealed him in his palace & cut him off from
his beloved people. He would proclaim the end of serfdom &
call on peasants & workers to rise in His Name against the
government.

Several times this ploy actually succeeded in sparking
revolts. Why? Because the single absolute ruler acts
metaphorically as a mirror for the unique and utter
absoluteness of the self. Each peasant looked into this
glassy legend & beheld his or her own freedom--an illusion,
but one that borrowed its magic from the logic of the dream.

A similar myth must have inspired the 17th century Ranters &
Antinomians & Fifth Monarchy Men who flocked to the Jacobite
standard with its erudite cabals & bloodproud conspiracies.
The radical mystics were betrayed first by Cromwell & then
by the Restoration--why not, finally, join with flippant
cavaliers & foppish counts, with Rosicrucians & Scottish
Rite Masons, to place an occult messiah on Albion's throne?

Among a people who cannot conceive human society without a
monarch, the desires of radicals may be expressed in
monarchical terms. Among a people who cannot conceive human
existence without a religion, radical desires may speak the
language of heresy.

Taoism rejected the whole of Confucian bureaucracy but
retained the image of the Emperor-Sage, who would sit silent
on his throne facing a propitious direction, doing
absolutely nothing.
In Islam the Ismailis took the idea of the Imam of the
Prophet's Household & metamorphosed it into the Imam-of-
one's-own-being, the perfected self who is beyond all Law &
rule, who is atoned with the One. And this doctrine led them
into revolt against Islam, to terror & assassination in the
name of pure esoteric self-liberation & total realization.

Classical 19th century anarchism defined itself in the
struggle against crown & church, & therefore on the waking
level it considered itself egalitarian & atheist. This
rhetoric however obscures what really happens: the "king"
becomes the "anarchist," the "priest" a "heretic." In this
strange duet of mutability the politician, the democrat, the
socialist, the rational ideologue can find no place; they
are deaf to the music & lack all sense of rhythm. Terrorist
& monarch are _archetypes_; these others are mere
functionaries.

Once anarch & king clutched each other's throats & waltzed a
totentanz--a splendid battle. Now, however, both are
relegated to history's trashbin--has-beens, curiosities of a
leisurely & more cultivated past. They whirl around so fast
that they seem to meld together...can they somehow have
become one thing, a Siamese twin, a Janus, a freakish unity?
"The sleep of Reason..." ah! most desirable & desirous
monsters!

Ontological Anarchy proclaims flatly, bluntly, & almost
brainlessly: yes, the two are now one. As a single entity
the anarch/king now is reborn; each of us the ruler of our
own flesh, our own creations--and as much of everything else
as we can grab & hold.

Our actions are justified by fiat & our relations are shaped
by treaties with other autarchs. We make the law for our own
domains--& the chains of the law have been broken. At
present perhaps we survive as mere Pretenders--but even so
we may seize a few instants, a few square feet of reality
over which to impose our absolute will, our _royaume_.
_L'etat_,_c'est_moi_.

If we are bound by any ethic or morality it must be one
which we ourselves have imagined, fabulously more exalted &
more liberating than the "moralic acid" of puritans &
humanists. "Ye are as gods"--"Thou art That."

The words _monarchism_ & _mysticism_ are used here in part
simply _pour_epater_ those egalito-atheist anarchists who
react with pious horror to any mention of pomp or
superstition-mongering. No champagne revolutions for _them_!

Our brand of anti-authoritarianism, however, thrives on
baroque paradox; it favors states of consciousness, emotion
& aesthetics over all petrified ideologies & dogma; it
embraces multitudes & relishes contradictions. Ontological
Anarchy is a hobgoblin for BIG minds.
The translation of the title (& key term) of Max Stirner's
magnum opus as _The_Ego_&_Its_Own_ has led to a subtle
misinterpretation of "individualism." The English-Latin word
_ego_ comes freighted & weighed with freudian & protestant
baggage. A careful reading of Stirner suggests that
_The_Unique_&_His_Own-ness_ would better reflect his
intentions, given that he never defines the ego
_in_opposition_to_ libido or id, or in opposition to "soul"
or "spirit." The Unique (_der_Einzige_) might best be
construed simply as the individual self.

Stirner commits no metaphysics, yet bestows on the Unique a
certain absoluteness. In what way then does this _Einzige_
differ from the Self of Advaita Vedanta? _Tat_tvam_asi_:
Thou (individual Self) art That (absolute Self).

Many believe that mysticism "dissolves the ego." Rubbish.
Only death does that (or such at least is our Sadducean
assumption). Nor does mysticism destroy the "carnal" or
"animal" self--which would also amount to suicide. What
mysticism really tries to surmount is false consciousness,
illusion, Consensus Reality, & all the failures of self that
accompany these ills. True mysticism creates a "self at
peace," a self with power. The highest task of metaphysics
(accomplished for example by Ibn Arabi, Boehme, Ramana
Maharshi) is in a sense to self-destruct, to identify
metaphysical & physical, transcendent & immanent, as ONE.
Certain _radical_monists_ have pushed this doctrine far
beyond mere pantheism or religious mysticism. An
apprehension of the immanent oneness of being inspires
certain antinomian heresies (the Ranters, the Assassins)
whom we consider our ancestors.

Stirner himself seems deaf to the possible spiritual
resonances of Individualism--& in this he belongs to the
19th century: born long after the deliquescence of
Christendom, but long before the discovery of the Orient &
of the hidden illuminist tradition in Western alchemy,
revolutionary heresy & occult activism. Stirner quite
correctly despised what he knew as "mysticism," a mere
pietistic sentimentality based on self-abnegation & world
hatred. Nietzsche nailed down the lid on "God" a few years
later. Since then, who has dared to suggest that
Individualism & mysticism might be reconciled & synthesized?

The missing ingredient in Stirner (Nietzsche comes closer)
is a working concept of _nonordinary_consciousness_. The
realization of the unique self (or _ubermensch_) must
reverberate & expand like waves or spirals or music to
embrace direct experience or intuitive perception of the
uniqueness of reality itself. This realization engulfs &
erases all duality, dichotomy, & dialectic. It carries with
itself, like an electric charge, an intense & wordless sense
of _value_: it "divinizes" the self.

Being/consciousness/bliss (_satchitananda_) cannot be
dismissed as merely another Stirnerian "spook" or "wheel in
the head." It invokes no exclusively transcendent principle
for which the _Einzige_ must sacrifice his/her own-ness. It
simply states that intense awareness of existence itself
results in "bliss"--or in less loaded language, "valuative
consciousness." The goal of the Unique after all is to
_possess_everything_; the radical monist attains this by
identifying self with perception, like the Chinese inkbrush
painter who "becomes the bamboo," so that "it paints
itself."
Despite mysterious hints Stirner drops about a "union of
Unique-ones" & despite Nietzsche's eternal "Yea" &
exaltation of life, their Individualism seems somehow shaped
by a certain _coldness_toward_the_other_. In part they
cultivated a bracing, cleansing chilliness against the warm
suffocation of 19th century sentimentality & altruism; in
part they simply despised what someone (Mencken?) called
"Homo Boobensis."

And yet, reading behind & beneath the layer of ice, we
uncover traces of a fiery doctrine--what Gaston Bachelard
might have called "a Poetics of the Other." The _Einzige's_
relation with the Other cannot be defined or limited by any
institution or idea. And yet clearly, however paradoxically,
the Unique depends for completeness on the Other, & cannot &
will not be realized in any bitter isolation.

The examples of "wolf children" or _enfants_sauvages_
suggest that a human infant deprived of human company for
too long will never attain conscious humanity--will never
acquire language. The Wild Child perhaps provides a poetic
metaphor for the Unique-one--and yet simultaneously marks
the precise point where Unique & Other must meet, coalesce,
unify--or else fail to attain & possess all of which they
are capable.

The Other mirrors the Self--the Other is our _witness_. The
Other completes the Self--the Other gives us the key to the
perception of oneness-of-being. When we speak of being &
consciousness, we point to the Self; when we speak of bliss
we implicate the Other.

The acquisition of language falls under the sign of Eros--
all communication is essentially erotic, all relations are
erotic. Avicenna & Dante claimed that love moves the very
stars & planets in their courses--the _Rg_Veda_ & Hesiod's
_Theogony_ both proclaim Love the first god born after
Chaos. Affections, affinities, aesthetic perceptions,
beautiful creations, conviviality--all the most precious
possessions of the Unique-one arise from the conjunction of
Self & Other in the constellation of Desire.

Here again the project begun by Individualism can be evolved
& revivified by a graft with mysticism--specifically with
tantra. As an esoteric _technique_ divorced from orthodox
Hinduism, tantra provides a symbolic framework ("Net of
Jewels") for the identification of sexual pleasure & non-
ordinary consciousness. All antinomian sects have contained
some "tantrik" aspect, from the families of Love & Free
Brethren & Adamites of Europe to the pederast sufis of
Persia to the Taoist alchemists of China. Even classical
anarchism has enjoyed its tantrik moments: Fourier's
Phalansteries; the "Mystical Anarchism" of G. Ivanov & other
fin-de-si.cle Russian symbolists; the incestuous erotism of
Arzibashaev's _Sanine_; the weird combination of Nihilism &
Kali-worship which inspired the Bengali Terrorist Party (to
which my tantrik guru Sri Kamanaransan Biswas had the honor
of belonging)...

We, however, propose a much deeper syncretism of anarchy &
tantra than any of these. In fact, we simply suggest that
Individual Anarchism & Radical Monism are to be considered
henceforth one and the same movement.

This hybrid has been called "spiritual materialism," a term
which burns up all metaphysics in the fire of oneness of
spirit & matter. We also like "Ontological Anarchy" because
it suggests that being itself remains in a state of "divine
Chaos," of all-potentiality, of continual creation.

In this flux only the _jiva_mukti_, or "liberated
individual," is self-realized, and thus monarch or owner of
his perceptions and relations. In this ceaseless flow only
desire offers any principle of order, and thus the only
possible society (as Fourier understood) is that of lovers.

Anarchism is dead, long live anarchy! We no longer need the
baggage of revolutionary masochism or idealist self-
sacrifice--or the frigidity of Individualism with its
disdain for conviviality, of _living_together_--or the
vulgar superstitions of 19th century atheism, scientism, and
progressism. All that dead weight! Frowsy proletarian
suitcases, heavy bourgeois steamer-trunks, boring
philosophical portmanteaux--over the side with them!

We want from these systems only their vitality, their life-
forces, daring, intransigence, anger, heedlessness--their
power, their _shakti_. Before we jettison the rubbish and
the carpetbags, we'll rifle the luggage for billfolds,
revolvers, jewels, drugs and other useful items--keep what
we like and trash the rest. Why not? Are we priests of a
cult, to croon over relics and mumble our martyrologies?

Monarchism too has something we want--a grace, an ease, a
pride, a superabundance. We'll take these, and dump the woes
of authority & torture in history's garbage bin. Mysticism
has something we need--"self-overcoming," exalted awareness,
reservoirs of psychic potency. These we will expropriate in
the name of our insurrection--and leave the woes of morality
& religion to rot & decompose.

As the Ranters used to say when greeting any "fellow
creature"--from king to cut-purse--"Rejoice! All is ours!"

*  *  *  *  *

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE KALI YUGA

THE KALI YUGA STILL has 200,000 or so years to play--good
news for advocates & avatars of CHAOS, bad news for
Brahmins, Yahwists, bureaucrat-gods & their runningdogs.

I knew Darjeeling hid something for me soon as I heard the
name--_dorje_ling_--Thunderbolt City. In 1969 I arrived just
before the monsoons. Old British hill station, summer hdqrs
for Govt. of Bengal--streets in the form of winding wood
staircases, the Mall with a View of Sikkim & Mt Katchenhunga-
-Tibetan temples & refugees--beautiful yellow-porcelain
people called Lepchas (the real abo's)--Hindus, Moslems,
Nepalese & Bhutanese Buddhists, & decaying Brits who lost
their way home in '47, still running musty banks & tea-
shoppes.

Met Ganesh Baba, fat white-bearded saddhu with overly-
impeccable Oxford accent--never saw anyone smoke so much
ganja, chillam after chillam full, then we'd wander the
streets while he played ball with shrieking kids or picked
fights in the bazaar, chasing after terrified clerks with
his umbrella, then roaring with laughter.

He introduced me to Sri Kamanaransan Biswas, a tiny wispy
middleage Bengali government clerk in a shabby suit, who
offered to teach me Tantra. Mr Biswas lived in a tiny
bungalow perched on a steep pine-tree misty hillside, where
I visited him daily with pints of cheap brandy for puja &
tippling--he encouraged me to smoke while we talked, since
ganja too is sacred to Kali.
Mr Biswas in his wild youth was a member of the Bengali
Terrorist Party, which included both Kali worshippers &
heretic Moslem mystics as well as anarchists & extreme
leftists. Ganesh Baba seemed to approve of this secret past,
as if it were a sign of Mr Biswas's hidden tantrika
strength, despite his outward seedy mild appearance.

We discussed my readings in Sir John Woodruffe ("Arthur
Avalon") each afternoon, I walked there thru cold summer
fogs, Tibetan spirit-traps flapping in the soaked breeze
loomed out of the mist & cedars. We practiced the Tara-
mantra and Tara-mudra (or Yoni-mudra), and studied the Tara-
yantra diagram for magical purposes. Once we visited a
temple to the Hindu Mars (like ours, both planet & war-god)
where he bought a finger-ring made from an iron horseshoe
nail & gave it to me. More brandy & ganja.

Tara: one of the forms of Kali, very similar in attributes:
dwarfish, naked, four-armed with weapons, dancing on dead
Shiva, necklace of skulls or severed heads, tongue dripping
blood, skin a deep blue-grey the precise color of monsoon
clouds. Every day more rain--mud-slides blocking roads. My
Border Area Permit expires. Mr Biswas & I descend the slick
wet Himalayas by jeep & train down to his ancestral city,
Siliguri in the flat Bengali plains where the Ganges fingers
into a sodden viridescent delta.

We visit his wife in the hospital. Last year a flood drowned
Siliguri killing tens of thousands. Cholera broke out, the
city's a wreck, algae-stained & ruined, the hospital's halls
still caked with slime, blood, vomit, the liquids of death.
She sits silent on her bed glaring unblinking at hideous
fates. Dark side of the goddess. He gives me a colored
lithograph of Tara which miraculously floated above the
water & was saved.

That night we attend some ceremony at the local Kali-temple,
a modest half-ruined little roadside shrine--torchlight the
only illumination--chanting & drums with strange, almost
African syncopation, totally unclassical, primordial & yet
insanely complex. We drink, we smoke.
Alone in the cemetery, next to a half-burnt corpse, I'm
initiated into Tara Tantra. Next day, feverish & spaced-out,
I say farewell & set out for Assam, to the great temple of
Shakti's _yoni_ in Gauhati, just in time for the annual
festival. Assam is forbidden territory & I have no permit.
Midnight in Gauhati I sneak off the train, back down the
tracks thru rain & mud up to my knees & total darkness,
blunder at last into the city & find a bug-ridden hotel.
Sick as a dog by this time. No sleep.

In the morning, bus up to the temple on a nearby mountain.
Huge towers, pullulating deities, courtyards, outbuildings--
hundreds of thousands of pilgrims--weird saddhus down from
their ice-caves squatting on tiger skins & chanting. Sheep &
doves are being slaughtered by the thousands, a real
hecatomb--(not another white sahib in sight)--gutters
running inch-deep in blood--curve-bladed Kali-swords chop
chop chop, dead heads plocking onto the slippery
cobblestones.

When Shiva chopped Shakti into 53 pieces & scattered them
over the whole Ganges basin, her cunt fell here. Some
friendly priests speak English & help me find the cave where
Yoni's on display. By this time I know I'm seriously sick,
but determined to finish the ritual. A herd of pilgrims (all
at least one head shorter than me) literally engulfs me like
an undertow-wave at the beach, & hurls me suspended down
suffocating winding troglodyte stairs into claustrophobic
womb-cave where I swirl nauseated & hallucinating toward a
shapeless cone meteorite smeared in centuries of ghee &
ochre. The herd parts for me, allows me to throw a garland
of jasmine over the yoni.

A week later in Kathmandu I enter the German Missionary
Hospital (for a month) with hepatitis. A small price to pay
for all that knowledge--the liver of some retired colonel
from a Kipling story!--but I know _her_, I know Kali. Yes
absolutely the archetype of all that horror, yet for those
who know, she becomes the generous mother. Later in a cave
in the jungle above Rishikish I meditated on Tara for
several days (with mantra, yantra, mudra, incense, &
flowers) & returned to the serenity of Darjeeling, its
beneficent visions.

Her age must contain horrors, for most of us cannot
understand her or reach beyond the necklace of skulls to the
garland of jasmine, knowing in what sense they are
_the_same_. To go thru CHAOS, to ride it like a tiger, to
embrace it (even sexually) & absorb some of its shakti, its
life-juice--this is the Path of Kali Yuga. Creative
nihilism. For those who follow it she promises enlightenment
& even wealth, a share of her temporal _power_.

The sexuality & violence serve as metaphors in a poem which
acts directly on consciousness through the Image-ination--or
else in the correct circumstances they can be openly
deployed & enjoyed, embued with a sense of the holiness of
_every_thing_ from ecstasy & wine to garbage & corpses.

Those who ignore her or see her outside themselves risk
destruction. Those who worship her as _ishta-devata_, or
divine self, taste her Age of Iron as if it were gold,
knowing the alchemy of her presence.

*  *  *  *  *

AGAINST THE REPRODUCTION OF DEATH

ONE OF THE SIGNS of that End Time so many seem to anticipate
would consist of a fascination with all the most negative &
hateful detritus of that Time, a fascination felt by the
very class of thinkers who consider themselves most
perspicacious about the so-called apocalypse they warn us to
beware. I'm speaking of people I know very well--those of
the "spiritual right" (such as the neo-Guenonians with their
obsession for signs of decadence)--& those of the post-
philosophical left, the detached essayists of death,
connoisseurs of the arts of mutilation.

For both these sets, all possible action in the world is
smeared out onto one level plain--all become equally
meaningless. For the Traditionalist, nothing matters but to
prepare the soul for death (not only its own but the whole
world's as well). For the "cultural critic" nothing matters
but the game of identifying yet one more reason for despair,
analyzing it, adding it to the catalogue.
Now the End of the World is an abstraction because it has
never happened. It has no existence in the real world. It
will cease to be an abstraction only when it happens--if it
happens. (I do not claim to know "God's mind" on the subject-
-nor to possess any scientific knowledge about a still non-
existent future). I see only a mental image & its emotional
ramifications; as such I identify it as a kind of ghostly
virus, a spook-sickness in myself which ought to be expunged
rather than hypochondriacally coddled & indulged. I have
come to despise the "End of the World" as an ideological
icon held over my head by religion, state, & cultural milieu
alike, as a reason for _doing_nothing_.

I understand why the religious & political "powers" would
want to keep me quaking in my shoes. Since only _they_ offer
even a _chance_ of evading ragnarok (thru prayer, thru
democracy, thru communism, etc.), I will sheepishly follow
their dictates & dare nothing on my own. The case of the
enlightened intellectuals, however, seems more puzzling at
first. What power do _they_ derive from this telling-the-
beads of fear & gloom, sadism & hatred?

Essentially they gain _smartness_. Any attack on them must
appear stupid, since they alone are clear-eyed enough to
recognize the truth, they alone daring enough to
_show_it_forth_ in defiance of rude shit-kicking censors &
liberal wimps. If I attack them as part of the very problem
they claim to be discussing objectively, I will be seen as a
bumpkin, a prude, a pollyanna. If I admit my hatred for the
_artifacts_ of their perception (books, artworks,
performances) then I may be dismissed as merely squeamish (&
so of course psychologically repressed), or else at the very
least lacking in seriousness.

Many people assume that because I sometimes express myself
as an anarchist boy-lover, I must also be "interested" in
other ultra-postmodern ideas like serial child-murder,
fascist ideology, or the photographs of Joel P. Witkin. They
assume only two sides to any issue--the hip side & the unhip
side. A marxist who objected to all this death-cultishness
as anti-progressive would be thought as foolish as a Xtian
fundamentalist who believed it immoral.

I maintain that (as usual) many sides exist to this issue
rather than only two. Two-sided issues (creationism vs
darwinism, "choice" vs "pro-life," etc.) are all without
exception _delusions_, spectacular lies.

My position is this: I am all too well aware of the
"intelligence" which prevents action. I myself possess it in
abundance. Every once in a while however I have managed to
behave as if I were stupid enough to try to change my life.
Sometimes I've used dangerous stupifiants like religion,
marijuana, chaos, the love of boys. On a few occasions I
have attained some degree of success--& I say this not to
boast but rather to bear witness. By overthrowing the inner
icons of the End of the World & the Futility of all mundane
endeavor, I have (rarely) broken through into a state which
(by comparison with all I'd known) appeared to be one of
_health_. The images of death & mutilation which fascinate
our artists & intellectuals appear to me--in the remembered
light of these experiences--tragically inappropriate to the
real potential of existence & of _discourse_ about
existence.

Existence itself may be considered an abyss possessed of no
meaning. I do not read this as a _pessimistic_ statement. If
it be true, then I can see in it nothing else but a
declaration of autonomy for my imagination & will--& for the
most beautiful act they can conceive with which to _bestow_
meaning upon existence.

Why should I emblemize this freedom with an act such as
murder (as did the existentialists) or with any of the
ghoulish tastes of the eighties? Death can only kill me once-
-till then I am free to express & experience (as much as I
_can_) a life & an art of life based on self-valuating "peak
experiences," as well as "conviviality" (which also
possesses its own reward).

The obsessive replication of Death-imagery (& its
reproduction or even commodification) _gets_in_the_way_ of
this project just as obstructively as censorship or media-
brainwashing. It sets up negative feedback loops--it is bad
juju. It helps no one conquer fear of death, but merely
inculcates a _morbid_ fear in place of the healthy fear all
sentient creatures feel at the smell of their own mortality.

This is not to absolve the world of its ugliness, or to deny
that truly fearful things exist in it. But some of these
things can be overcome--on the condition that we build an
_aesthetic_ on the overcoming rather than the fear.

I recently attended a gay dance/poetry performance of
uncompromising hipness: the one black dancer in the troupe
had to pretend to fuck a dead sheep.

Part of my self-induced stupidity, I confess, is to believe
(& even feel) that art can change me, & change others.
That's why I write pornography & propaganda--to cause
_change_. Art can never mean as much as a love affair,
perhaps, or an insurrection. But...to a certain extent...it
works.
Even if I'd given up all hope in art, however, all
expectation of exaltation, I would still refuse to put up
with art that merely exacerbates my misery, or indulges in
_schadenfreude_, "delight in the misery of others." I turn
away from certain art as a dog would turn away howling from
the corpse of its companion. I'd like to renounce the
sophistication which would permit me to sniff it with
detached curiosity as yet another example of post-industrial
decomposition.

Only the dead are truly smart, truly cool. Nothing touches
them. While I live, however, I side with bumbling suffering
crooked life, with anger rather than boredom, with sweet
lust, hunger & carelessness...against the icy avant-guard &
its fashionable premonitions of the sepulcher.

*  *  *  *  *

RINGING DENUNCIATION OF SURREALISM

(For Harry Smith)

AT THE SURREALIST FILM show, someone asked Stan Brakhage
about the media's use of surrealism (MTV, etc.); he answered
that it was a "damn shame." Well, maybe it is & maybe it
isn't (does popular kultur _ipso_facto_ lack all
inspiration?)--but granting that on some level the media's
appropriation of surrealism is a damn shame, are we to
believe that there was nothing in surrealism that allowed
this theft to occur?

The return of the repressed means the return of the
paleolithic--not a return _to_ the Old Stone Age, but a
spiralling around on a new level of the gyre. (After all,
99.9999% of human experience is of hunting/gathering, with
agriculture & industry a mere oil slick on the deep well of
non-history.) Paleolithic equals pre-Work ("original leisure
society"). Post-Work (Zerowork) equals "Psychic
Paleolithism."

All projects for the "liberation of desire" (Surrealism)
which remain enmeshed in the matrix of Work can only lead to
the commodification of desire. The Neolithic begins with
desire for commodities (agricultural surplus), moves on to
the production of desire (industry), & ends with the
implosion of desire (advertising). The Surrealist liberation
of desire, for all its aesthetic accomplishments, remains no
more than a subset of production--hence the wholesaling of
Surrealism to the Communist Party & its Work-ist ideology
(not to mention attendant misogyny & homophobia). Modern
leisure, in turn, is simply a subset of Work (hence its
commodification)--so it is no accident that when Surrealism
closed up shop, the only customers at the garage sale were
ad execs.

Advertising, using Surrealism's colonization of the
unconscious to _create_ desire, leads to the final implosion
of Surrealism. It's not just a "damn shame & a disgrace,"
not a simple appropriation. Surrealism was _made_ for
advertising, for commodification. Surrealism is in fact a
betrayal of desire.

And yet, out of this abyss of meaning, desire still rises,
innocent as a new-hatched phoenix. Early Berlin dada (which
rejected the return of the art-object) for all its faults
provides a better model for dealing with the implosion of
the social than Surrealism could ever do--an anarchist
model, or perhaps (in anthro-jargon) a non-authoritarian
model, a destruction of all ideology, of all chains of law.
As the structure of Work/Leisure crumbles into emptiness, as
all forms of control vanish in the dissolution of meaning,
the Neolithic seems bound to vanish as well, with all its
temples & granaries & police, to be replaced by some return
of hunting/gathering on the psychic level--a re-
nomadization. Everything's imploding & disappearing--the
oedipal family, education, even the unconscious itself (as
Andr. Codrescu says). Let's not mistake this for Armageddon
(let's resist the seduction of apocalypse, the
eschatological con)--it's not _the_world_ coming to an end--
only the empty husks of the social, catching fire &
disappearing.

Surrealism must be junked along with all the other beautiful
bric-a-brac of agricultural priestcraft & vapid control-
systems. No one knows what's coming, what misery, what
spirit of wildness, what joy--but the last thing we need on
our voyage is another set of commissars--popes of our dreams-
-daddies. Down with Surrealism...

--Naropa, July 9, 1988

*  *  *  *  *

FOR A CONGRESS OF WEIRD RELIGIONS

WE'VE LEARNED TO DISTRUST the verb _to_be_, the word _is_--
let's say rather: note the striking resemblance between the
concept SATORI & the concept REVOLUTION OF EVERYDAY LIFE--in
both cases: a perception of the "ordinary" with
extraordinary consequences for consciousness & action. We
can't use the phrase "is like" because both concepts (like
all concepts, all words for that matter) come crusted with
accretions--each burdened with all its psycho-cultural
baggage, like guests who arrive suspiciously overly well-
supplied for the weekend.

So allow me the old-fashioned Beat-Zennish use of _satori_,
while simultaneously emphasizing--in the case of the
Situationist slogan--that one of the roots of its dialectic
can be traced to dada & Surrealism's notion of the
"marvelous" erupting from (or into) a life which only
_seems_ suffocated by the banal, by the miseries of
abstraction & alienation. I define my terms by making them
more vague, precisely in order to avoid the orthodoxies of
both Buddhism & Situationism, to evade their ideologico-
semantic traps--those broken-down language machines! Rather,
I propose we ravage them for parts, an act of cultural
bricolage. "Revolution" means just another turn of the crank-
-while religious orthodoxy of any sort leads logically to a
veritable government of cranks. Let's not idolize satori by
imagining it the monopoly of mystic monks, or as contingent
on any moral code; & rather than fetishize the Leftism of
'68 we prefer Stirner's term "insurrection" or "uprising,"
which escapes the built-in implications of a mere change of
authority.

This constellation of concepts involves "breaking rules" of
ordered perception to arrive at direct experiencing,
somewhat analogous to the process whereby chaos
spontaneously resolves into fractal nonlinear orders, or the
way in which "wild" creative energy resolves as play &
_poesis_. "Spontaneous order" out of "chaos" in turn evokes
the anarchist Taoism of the _Chuang_Tzu_. Zen may be accused
of lacking awareness of the "revolutionary" implications of
satori, while the Situationists can be criticized for
ignoring a certain "spirituality" inherent in the self-
realization & conviviality their cause demands. By
identifying satori with the r. of e.d.l. we're performing a
bit of a shotgun marriage fully as remarkable as the
Surrealists' famous mating of an umbrella & sewing machine
or whatever it was. Miscegenation. The race-mixing advocated
by Nietzsche, who was attracted, no doubt, by the sexiness
of the half-caste.

I'm tempted to try to describe the way satori "is" like the
r. of e.d.l.--but I can't. Or to put it another way: nearly
all I write revolves around this theme; I would have to
repeat nearly everything in order to elucidate this single
point. Instead, as an appendix, I offer one more curious
coincidence or interpenetration of 2 terms, one from
Situationism again & the other this time from sufism.
The _d.rive_ or "drift" was conceived as an exercise in
deliberate revolutionizing of everyday life--a sort of
aimless wandering thru city streets, a visionary urban
nomadism involving an openness to "culture as nature" (if I
grasp the idea correctly)--which by its sheer duration would
inculcate in the drifters a propensity to experience the
marvelous; not always in its beneficent form perhaps, but
hopefully always productive of insight--whether thru
architecture, the erotic, adventure, drink & drugs, danger,
inspiration, whatever--into the intensity of unmediated
perception & experience.
The parallel term in sufism would be "journeying to the far
horizons" or simply "journeying," a spiritual exercise which
combines the urban & nomadic energies of Islam into a single
trajectory, sometimes called "the Caravan of Summer." The
dervish vows to travel at a certain velocity, perhaps
spending no more than 7 nights or 40 nights in one city,
accepting whatever comes, moving wherever signs &
coincidences or simply whims may lead, heading from power-
spot to power-spot, conscious of "sacred geography," of
itinerary as meaning, of topology as symbology.
Here's another constellation: Ibn Khaldun, _On_the_Road_
(both Jack Kerouac's & Jack London's), the form of the
picaresque novel in general, Baron Munchausen, _wanderjahr_,
Marco Polo, boys in a suburban summer forest, Arthurian
knights out questing for trouble, queers out cruising for
boys, pub-crawling with Melville, Poe, Baudelaire--or
canoeing with Thoreau in Maine...travel as the antithesis of
tourism, space _rather_than_ time. Art project: the
construction of a "map" bearing a 1:1 ratio to the
"territory" explored. Political project: the construction of
shifting "autonomous zones" within an invisible nomadic
network (like the Rainbow Gatherings). Spiritual project:
the creation or discovery of pilgrimages in which the
concept "shrine" has been replaced (or esotericized) by the
concept "peak experience."

What I'm trying to do here (as usual) is to provide a sound
irrational basis, a strange philosophy if you like, for what
I call the Free Religions, including the Psychedelic &
Discordian currents, non-hierarchical neo-paganism,
antinomian heresies, chaos & Kaos Magik, revolutionary
HooDoo, "unchurched" & anarchist Christians, Magical
Judaism, the Moorish Orthodox Church, Church of the
SubGenius, the Faeries, radical Taoists, beer mystics,
people of the Herb, etc., etc.

Contrary to the expectations of 19th century radicals,
religion has not gone away--perhaps we'd be better off if it
had--but has instead increased in power, seemingly in
proportion to the global increase in the realm of technology
& rational control. Both fundamentalism & the New Age derive
some force from deep & widespread dissatisfaction with the
System that works against all perception of the
marvelousness of everyday life--call it Babylon or the
Spectacle, Capital or Empire, Society of Simulation or of
soulless mechanism--what you wish. But these two religious
forces divert the very desire for the authentic toward
overpowering & oppressive new abstractions (morality in the
case of fundamentalism, commodification in the case of the
New Age), & for this reason can quite properly be called
"reactionary."

Just as cultural radicals will seek to infiltrate & subvert
the popular media, & just as political radicals will perform
similar functions in the spheres of Work, Family, & other
social organizations, so there exists a need for radicals to
penetrate the institution of religion itself rather than
merely continue to mouth 19th century platitudes about
atheistic materialism. It's going to happen anyway--better
to approach it with consciousness, with grace & style.

Having once lived near the Hdqrs of the World Council of
Churches, I like the possibility of a Free Churches parody
version--parody being one of our chief strategies (or call
it _d.tournement_ or deconstruction or creative destruction)-
-a sort of loose network (I dislike that word; let's call it
a "webwork" instead) of weird cults & individuals providing
conversation & services for each other, out of which might
begin to emerge a trend or tendency or "current" (in magical
terms) strong enough to wreak some psychic havoc on the
Fundies & New Agers, even the ayatollahs & the Papacy,
convivial enough for us to disagree with each other & yet
still give great parties--or conclaves, or ecumenical
councils, or World Congresses--which we anticipate with
glee.
The Free Religions may offer some of the only possible
spiritual alternatives to televangelist stormtroopers &
pinhead crystal-channelers (not to mention the established
religions), & will thus become more & more important, more &
more vital in a future where the demand for the eruption of
the marvelous into the ordinary will become the most
ringing, poignant & tumultuous of all political demands--a
future which will begin (wait a minute, lemme check my
clock)...7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1...NOW.

*  *  *  *  *

HOLLOW EARTH

SUBTERRANEAN REGIONS OF THE continent excavated in
cyclopaean caverns, cathedralspace fractal networks,
labyrinthine gargantuan tunnels, slow black underground
rivers, unmoving stygian lakes, pure & slightly
luminiferous, slim waterfalls plunging down watersmooth
rock, cataracting round petrified forests of stalactites &
stalagmites in spelunker-bewildering blind-fish complexity &
unfathomable vastness...Who dug this hollow earth beneath
the ice foreseen by Poe, by certain paranoid German
occultists, Shaverian UFO freaks? Was Earth once colonized
in the time of Gondwana or MU by some Elder Race? their
reptilian skeletons still mouldering in the farthest secret
mazes of the cavern system? Sluggish backwaters, dead-end
canals, stagnant pools far from the centers of civilization
like Little America, Transport City, or Nan Chi Han, down in
the dark recesses and boondocks of the Antarctic caves,
fungus & albino fern. We suspect them of mutations,
amphibian webbed fingers and toes, degenerate habits--
Kallikaks of the Hollow Earth, Lovecraftian renegades,
hermits, skulking incestuous smugglers, runaway criminals,
anarchists forced into hiding after the Entropy Wars,
fugitives from Genetic Puritanism, dissident Chinese Tongs &
Yellow Turban fanatics, lascar cave-pirates, pale shiftless
whitetrash from the prolewarrens of the industrial domes
along Thwait's Tongue & the Walgreen Coast & Edsel-Ford-Land-
-the Trogs have kept alive for over 200 years the folk-
memory of the Autonomous Zone, the myth that someday it will
appear again...Taoism, libertine philosophy, Indonesian
sorcery, cult of the Cave Mother (or Mothers), identified by
some scholars with the Javanese sea/moon goddess Loro Kidul,
by others with a minor deity of the South Pole Star Sect,
the "Jade Goddess"...manuscripts (written in Bahasa Ingliss
the pidgin dialect of the deep caves) contain mangled
quotations from Nietzsche & Chuang Tzu...Trade consists of
occasional precious gems and cultivation of white poppy,
fungus, over a dozen different species of "magic"
mushrooms...Shallow Lake Erebus, 5 miles across, dotted with
stalagmitic islets choked with fern & kudzu & black dwarf
pine, held in a cave so vast it sometimes creates its own
weather...The town belongs officially to Little America but
most of the inhabitants are Trogs living off the Shiftless
Dole--& the deep-cave tribal country lies just across the
Lake. Riffraff, artists, drug addicts, sorcerers, smugglers,
remittance-men & perverts live in crumbling basalt-&-
synthplast hotels half-encrusted with pale green vines,
along the lakefront, an avenue of squalid cafes, gem emporia
guarded by armed ninjas, chinese krill-noodle shops, the
crystal-tinselled hall for slow fusion-gamelan dancers, boys
practicing their mudras on sleepy electronic dark blue
afternoons to the rippling of synthgongs and
metallophones...& below the pier perhaps a few desultory
bathers along the black beach, genuine low-budget tourists
gawking at the shrine behind the bazaar where pallid old
Trog pamongs tranced out on fungus drool & roll up their
eyes, breathe in the fumes of heavy incense, everything
seems suddenly menacingly bright, flickering with
significance...a few cases of webbed fingers but the rumors
of ritual promiscuity are true enough. I was living in a
Trog fishing village across the lake from Erebus in a rented
room above the baitshop...rural sloth & degenerate
superstitious rites of sensual abandon, the larval &
unhealthy mysteries of the chthonic mutant downtrodden
Trogs, lazy shiftless no-count hicks...Little America, so
christian & free of mutation, eugenic & orderly, where ev-
eryone lives jacked into the fleshless realm of ancient
software & holography, so euclidean, newtonian, clean &
patriotic--L.A. will never understand this innocent filth-
sorcery, this "spiritual materialism," this slavery to the
volcanic desires of secret cave-boy gangs like laughing
flowers jetting with dynamo erections pulsing up pure life
curved taut as bows, & the smell of water, pond-scum,
nightblooming white flowers, jasmine & datura, urine,
children's wet hair, sperm & mud...possessed by cave-
spirits, perhaps ghosts of ancient aliens now wandering as
demons seeking to renew long-lost pleasures of flesh &
substance. Or else the Zone has already been reborn, already
a nexus of autonomy, a spreading virus of chaos in its most
exuberant clandestine form, white toadstools springing up on
the spots where Trog boys have masturbated alone in the
dark...

*  *  *  *  *

NIETZSCHE & THE DERVISHES

_RENDAN_, "THE CLEVER ONES." The sufis use a technical term
_rend_ (adj. _rendi_, pl. _rendan_) to designate one "clever
enough to drink wine in secret without getting caught": the
dervish version of "Permissible Dissimulation" (_taqiyya_,
whereby Shiites are permitted to lie about their true
affiliation to avoid persecution as well as advance the
purpose of their propaganda).

On the plane of the "Path," the _rend_ conceals his
spiritual state (_hal_) in order to contain it, work on it
alchemically, enhance it. This "cleverness" explains much of
the secrecy of the Orders, altho it remains true that many
dervishes do literally break the rules of Islam (_shariah_),
offend tradition (_sunnah_), and flout the customs of their
society--all of which gives them reason for _real_ secrecy.

Ignoring the case of the "criminal" who uses sufism as a
mask--or rather not sufism per se but _dervish_-ism, almost
a synonym in Persia for laid-back manners & by extension a
social laxness, a style of genial and poor but elegant
amorality--the above definition can still be considered in a
literal as well as metaphorical sense. That is: some sufis
do break the Law while still allowing that the Law exists &
will continue to exist; & they do so from spiritual motives,
as an exercise of will (_himmah_).

Nietzsche says somewhere that the free spirit will not
agitate for the rules to be dropped or even reformed, since
it is only by breaking the rules that he realizes his will
to power. One must prove (to oneself if no one else) an
ability to overcome the rules of the herd, to make one's own
law & yet not fall prey to the rancor & resentment of
inferior souls which define law & custom in ANY society. One
needs, in effect, an individual equivalent of war in order
to achieve the becoming of the free spirit--one needs an
inert stupidity against which to measure one's own movement
& intelligence.

Anarchists sometimes posit an ideal society without law. The
few anarchist experiments which succeeded briefly (the
Makhnovists, Catalan) failed to survive the conditions of
war which permitted their existence in the first place--so
we have no way of knowing empirically if such an experiment
could outlive the onset of peace.

Some anarchists, however, like our late friend the Italian
Stirnerite "Brand," took part in all sorts of uprisings and
revolutions, even communist and socialist ones, because they
found in the moment of insurrection itself the kind of
freedom they sought. Thus while utopianism has so far always
failed, the individualist or existentialist anarchists have
succeeded inasmuch as they have attained (however briefly)
the realization of their will to power in war.

Nietzsche's animadversions against "anarchists" are always
aimed at the egalitarian-communist narodnik martyr types,
whose idealism he saw as yet one more survival of post-Xtian
moralism--altho he sometimes praises them for at least
having the courage to revolt against majoritarian authority.
He never mentions Stirner, but I believe he would have
classified the Individualist rebel with the higher types of
"criminals," who represented for him (as for Dostoyevsky)
humans far superior to the herd, even if tragically flawed
by their obsessiveness and perhaps hidden motivations of
revenge.

The Nietzschean overman, if he existed, would have to share
to some degree in this "criminality" even if he had overcome
all obsessions and compulsions, if only because his law
could never agree with the law of the masses, of state &
society. His need for "war" (whether literal or
metaphorical) might even persuade him to take part in
revolt, whether it assumed the form of insurrection or only
of a proud bohemianism.

For him a "society without law" might have value only so
long as it could measure its own freedom against the
subjection of others, against their jealousy & hatred. The
lawless & short-lived "pirate utopias" of Madagascar & the
Caribbean, D'Annunzio's Republic of Fiume, the Ukraine or
Barcelona--these would attract him because they promised the
turmoil of becoming & even "failure" rather than the bucolic
somnolence of a "perfected" (& hence dead) anarchist
society.

In the absence of such opportunities, this free spirit would
disdain wasting time on agitation for reform, on protest, on
visionary dreaming, on all kinds of "revolutionary
martyrdom"--in short, on most contemporary anarchist
activity. To be _rendi_, to drink wine in secret & not get
caught, to accept the rules in order to break them & thus
attain the spiritual lift or energy-rush of danger &
adventure, the private epiphany of overcoming all interior
police while tricking all outward authority--this might be a
goal worthy of such a spirit, & this might be his definition
of crime.
(Incidentally, I think this reading helps explain N's
insistence on the MASK, on the secretive nature of the proto-
overman, which disturbs even intelligent but somewhat
liberal commentators like Kaufman. Artists, for all that N
loves them, are criticized for _telling_secrets_. Perhaps he
failed to consider that--paraphrasing A. Ginsberg--this is
_our_ way of becoming "great"; and also that--paraphrasing
Yeats--even the truest secret becomes yet another mask.)

As for the anarchist movement today: would we like just once
to stand on ground where laws are abolished & the last
priest is strung up with the guts of the last bureaucrat?
Yeah sure. But we're not holding our breath. There are
certain causes (to quote the Neech again) that one fails to
quite abandon, if only because of the sheer insipidity of
all their enemies. Oscar Wilde might have said that one
cannot be a gentleman without being something of an
anarchist--a necessary paradox, like N's "radical
aristocratism."

This is not just a matter of spiritual dandyism, but also of
existential commitment to an underlying spontaneity, to a
philosophical "tao." For all its waste of energy, in its
very formlessness, anarchism alone of all the ISMs
approaches that one _type_ of form which alone can interest
us today, that strange attractor, the shape of _chaos_--
which (one last quote) one must have within oneself, if one
is to give birth to a dancing star.

--Spring Equinox, 1989

*  *  *  *  *

RESOLUTION FOR THE 1990's: BOYCOTT COP CULTURE!!!

IF ONE FICTIONAL FIGURE can be said to have dominated the
popcult of the eighties, it was the Cop. Fuckin' police ev-
erywhere you turned, worse than real life. What an
incredible bore.
Powerful Cops--protecting the meek and humble--at the
expense of a half-dozen or so articles of the Bill of Rights-
-"Dirty Harry." Nice human cops, coping with human
perversity, coming out sweet 'n' sour, you know, gruff &
knowing but still soft inside--_Hill_Street_Blues_--most
evil TV show ever. Wiseass black cops scoring witty racist
remarks against hick white cops, who nevertheless come to
love each other--Eddie Murphy, Class Traitor. For that
masochist thrill we got wicked bent cops who threaten to
topple our Kozy Konsensus Reality from within like Giger-
designed tapeworms, but naturally get blown away just in the
nick of time by the Last Honest Cop, Robocop, ideal amalgam
of prosthesis and sentimentality.

We've been obsessed with cops since the beginning--but the
rozzers of yore played bumbling fools, Keystone Kops,
_Car_54_Where_Are_You_, booby-bobbies set up for Fatty
Arbuckle or Buster Keaton to squash & deflate. But in the
ideal drama of the eighties, the "little man" who once
scattered bluebottles by the hundred with that anarchist's
bomb, innocently used to light a cigarette--the Tramp, the
victim with the sudden power of the pure heart--no longer
has a place at the center of narrative. Once "we" were that
hobo, that quasi-surrealist chaote hero who wins thru _wu-
wei_ over the ludicrous minions of a despised & irrelevant
Order. But now "we" are reduced to the status of victims
_without_ power, or else criminals. "We" no longer occupy
that central role; no longer the heros of our own stories,
we've been marginalized & replaced by the Other, the Cop.

Thus the Cop Show has only three characters--victim,
criminal, and policeperson--but the first two fail to be
fully human--only the pig is _real_. Oddly enough, human
society in the eighties (as seen in the other media)
sometimes appeared to consist of the same three
cliche/archetypes. First the victims, the whining minorities
bitching about "rights"--and who pray tell did _not_ belong
to a "minority" in the eighties? Shit, even cops complained
about their "rights" being abused. Then the criminals:
largely non-white (despite the obligatory & hallucinatory
"integration" of the media), largely poor (or else obscenely
rich, hence even more alien), largely perverse (i.e. the
forbidden mirrors of "our" desires). I've heard that one out
of four households in America is robbed every year, & that
every year nearly half a million of us are arrested just for
smoking pot. In the face of such statistics (even assuming
they're "damned lies") one wonders who is NOT either victim
or criminal in our police-state-of-consciousness. The fuzz
must mediate for _all_of_us_, however fuzzy the interface--
they're only warrior-priests, however profane.
_America's_Most_Wanted_--the most successful TV game show of
the eighties--opened up for all of us the role of Amateur
Cop, hitherto merely a media fantasy of middleclass
resentment & revenge. Naturally the truelife Cop hates no
one so much as the vigilante--look what happens to poor &/or
non-white neighborhood self-protection groups like the
Muslims who tried to eliminate crack dealing in Brooklyn:
the cops busted the Muslims, the pushers went free. Real
vigilantes threaten the monopoly of enforcement,
_l.se_majest._, more abominable than incest or murder. But
media(ted) vigilantes function perfectly within the
CopState; in fact, it would be more accurate to think of
them as _unpaid_ (not even a set of matched luggage!)
_informers_: telemetric snitches, electro-stoolies, ratfinks-
for-a-day.

What is it that "America most wants"? Does this phrase refer
to criminals--or to crimes, to objects of desire in their
real presence, unrepresented, unmediated, literally stolen &
appropriated? America most wants...to fuck off work, ditch
the spouse, do drugs (because only drugs make you feel as
good as the people in TV ads appear to be), have sex with
nubile jailbait, sodomy, burglary, hell yes. What unmediated
pleasures are NOT illegal? Even outdoor barbecues violate
smoke ordinances nowadays. The simplest enjoyments turn us
against some law; finally pleasure becomes too stress-
inducing, and only TV remains--and the pleasure of revenge,
vicarious betrayal, the sick thrill of the tattletale.
America can't have what it most wants, so it has
_America's_Most_Wanted_ instead. A nation of schoolyard
toadies sucking up to an elite of schoolyard bullies.

Of course the program still suffers from a few strange
reality-glitches: for example, the dramatized segments are
enacted cinema verit. style by _actors_; some viewers are so
stupid they believe they're seeing actual footage of real
crimes. Hence the actors are being continually harassed &
even arrested, along with (or instead of) the real criminals
whose mugshots are flashed after each little documentoid.
How quaint, eh? No one really experiences anything--everyone
reduced to the status of ghosts--media-images break off &
float away from any contact with actual everyday life--
PhoneSex--CyberSex. Final transcendence of the body:
cybergnosis.
The media cops, like televangelical forerunners, prepare us
for the advent, final coming or Rapture of the police state:
the "Wars" on sex and drugs: total control totally leached
of all content; a map with no coordinates in any known
space; far beyond mere Spectacle; sheer ecstasy ("standing-
outside-the-body"); obscene simulacrum; meaningless violent
spasms elevated to the last principle of governance. Image
of a country consumed by images of self-hatred, war between
the schizoid halves of a split personality, Super-Ego vs the
Id Kid, for the heavyweight championship of an abandoned
landscape, burnt, polluted, empty, desolate, unreal.
Just as the murder-mystery is always an exercise in sadism,
so the cop-fiction always involves the contemplation of
_control_. The image of the inspector or detective measures
the image of "our" lack of autonomous substance, our
transparency before the gaze of authority. Our perversity,
our helplessness. Whether we imagine them as "good" or
"evil," our obsessive invocation of the eidolons of the Cops
reveals the extent to which we have accepted the manichaean
worldview they symbolize. Millions of tiny cops swarm
everywhere, like the qlippoth, larval hungry ghosts--they
fill the screen, as in Keaton's famous two-reeler,
overwhelming the foreground, an Antarctic where nothing
moves but hordes of sinister blue penguins.

We propose an esoteric hermeneutical exegesis of the
Surrealist slogan "_Mort_aux_vaches_!" We take it to refer
not to the deaths of individual cops ("cows" in the argot of
the period)--mere leftist revenge fantasy--petty reverse
sadism--but rather to the death of the _image_ of the
_flic_, the inner Control & its myriad reflections in the
NoPlace Place of the media--the "gray room" as Burroughs
calls it. Self-censorship, fear of one's own desires,
"conscience" as the interiorized voice of consensus-
authority. To assassinate these "security forces" would
indeed release floods of libidinal energy, but not the
violent running-amok predicted by the theory of Law 'n'
Order.

Nietzschean "self-overcoming" provides the principle of
organization for the free spirit (as also for anarchist
society, at least in theory). In the police-state
personality, libidinal energy is dammed & diverted toward
self-repression; any threat to Control results in spasms of
violence. In the free-spirit personality, energy flows
unimpeded & therefore turbulently but gently--its chaos
finds its strange attractor, allowing new spontaneous orders
to emerge.

In this sense, then, we call for a boycott of the image of
the Cop, & a moratorium on its production in art. In this
sense...

MORT AUX VACHES!

THE TEMPORARY AUTONOMOUS ZONE

"...this time however I come as the victorious Dionysus, who
will turn the world into a holiday...Not that I have much
time..."

--Nietzsche (from his last "insane" letter to Cosima Wagner)

Pirate Utopias

THE SEA-ROVERS AND CORSAIRS of the 18th century created an
"information network" that spanned the globe: primitive and
devoted primarily to grim business, the net nevertheless
functioned admirably. Scattered throughout the net were
islands, remote hideouts where ships could be watered and
provisioned, booty traded for luxuries and necessities. Some
of these islands supported "intentional communities," whole
mini-societies living consciously outside the law and
determined to keep it up, even if only for a short but merry
life.

Some years ago I looked through a lot of secondary material
on piracy hoping to find a study of these enclaves--but it
appeared as if no historian has yet found them worthy of
analysis. (William Burroughs has mentioned the subject, as
did the late British anarchist Larry Law--but no systematic
research has been carried out.) I retreated to primary
sources and constructed my own theory, some aspects of which
will be discussed in this essay. I called the settlements
"Pirate Utopias."

Recently Bruce Sterling, one of the leading exponents of
Cyberpunk science fiction, published a near-future romance
based on the assumption that the decay of political systems
will lead to a decentralized proliferation of experiments in
living: giant worker-owned corporations, independent
enclaves devoted to "data piracy," Green-Social-Democrat
enclaves, Zerowork enclaves, anarchist liberated zones, etc.
The information economy which supports this diversity is
called the Net; the enclaves (and the book's title) are
_Islands in the Net_.

The medieval Assassins founded a "State" which consisted of
a network of remote mountain valleys and castles, separated
by thousands of miles, strategically invulnerable to
invasion, connected by the information flow of secret
agents, at war with all governments, and devoted only to
knowledge. Modern technology, culminating in the spy
satellite, makes this kind of _autonomy_ a romantic dream.
No more pirate islands! In the future the same technology--
freed from all political control--could make possible an
entire world of _autonomous zones_. But for now the concept
remains precisely science fiction--pure speculation.

Are we who live in the present doomed never to experience
autonomy, never to stand for one moment on a bit of land
ruled only by freedom? Are we reduced either to nostalgia
for the past or nostalgia for the future? Must we wait until
the entire world is freed of political control before even
one of us can claim to know freedom? Logic and emotion unite
to condemn such a supposition. Reason demands that one
cannot struggle for what one does not know; and the heart
revolts at a universe so cruel as to visit such injustices
on _our_ generation alone of humankind.

To say that "I will not be free till all humans (or all
sentient creatures) are free" is simply to cave in to a kind
of nirvana-stupor, to abdicate our humanity, to define
ourselves as losers.

I believe that by extrapolating from past and future stories
about "islands in the net" we may collect evidence to
suggest that a certain kind of "free enclave" is not only
possible in our time but also existent. All my research and
speculation has crystallized around the concept of the
TEMPORARY AUTONOMOUS ZONE (hereafter abbreviated TAZ).
Despite its synthesizing force for my own thinking, however,
I don't intend the TAZ to be taken as more than an _essay_
("attempt"), a suggestion, almost a poetic fancy. Despite
the occasional Ranterish enthusiasm of my language I am not
trying to construct political dogma. In fact I have
deliberately refrained from defining the TAZ--I circle
around the subject, firing off exploratory beams. In the end
the TAZ is almost self-explanatory. If the phrase became
current it would be understood without
difficulty...understood in action.

Waiting for the Revolution

HOW IS IT THAT "the world turned upside-down" always manages
to _Right_ itself? Why does reaction always follow
revolution, like seasons in Hell?

_Uprising_, or the Latin form _insurrection_, are words used
by historians to label _failed_ revolutions--movements which
do not match the expected curve, the consensus-approved
trajectory: revolution, reaction, betrayal, the founding of
a stronger and even more oppressive State--the turning of
the wheel, the return of history again and again to its
highest form: jackboot on the face of humanity forever.

By failing to follow this curve, the _up-rising_ suggests
the possibility of a movement outside and beyond the
Hegelian spiral of that "progress" which is secretly nothing
more than a vicious circle. _Surgo_--rise up, surge.
_Insurgo_--rise up, raise oneself up. A bootstrap operation.
A goodbye to that wretched parody of the karmic round,
historical revolutionary futility. The slogan "Revolution!"
has mutated from tocsin to toxin, a malign pseudo-Gnostic
fate-trap, a nightmare where no matter how we struggle we
never escape that evil Aeon, that incubus the State, one
State after another, every "heaven" ruled by yet one more
evil angel.

If History IS "Time," as it claims to be, then the uprising
is a moment that springs up and out of Time, violates the
"law" of History. If the State IS History, as it claims to
be, then the insurrection is the forbidden moment, an
unforgivable denial of the dialectic--shimmying up the pole
and out of the smokehole, a shaman's maneuver carried out at
an "impossible angle" to the universe.
History says the Revolution attains "permanence," or at
least duration, while the uprising is "temporary." In this
sense an uprising is like a "peak experience" as opposed to
the standard of "ordinary" consciousness and experience.
Like festivals, uprisings cannot happen every day--otherwise
they would not be "nonordinary." But such moments of
intensity give shape and meaning to the entirety of a life.
The shaman returns--you can't stay up on the roof forever--
but things have changed, shifts and integrations have
occurred--a _difference_ is made.

You will argue that this is a counsel of despair. What of
the anarchist dream, the Stateless state, the Commune, the
autonomous zone with _duration_, a free society, a free
_culture_? Are we to abandon that hope in return for some
existentialist _acte_gratuit_? The point is not to change
consciousness but to change the world.

I accept this as a fair criticism. I'd make two rejoinders
nevertheless; first, _revolution_ has never yet resulted in
achieving this dream. The vision comes to life in the moment
of uprising--but as soon as "the Revolution" triumphs and
the State returns, the dream and the ideal are _already_
betrayed. I have not given up hope or even expectation of
change--but I distrust the word _Revolution_. Second, even
if we replace the revolutionary approach with a concept of
_insurrection_blossoming_spontaneously_into_anarchist_
culture_, our own particular historical situation is not
propitious for such a vast undertaking. Absolutely nothing
but a futile martyrdom could possibly result now from a head-
on collision with the terminal State, the megacorporate
information State, the empire of Spectacle and Simulation.
Its guns are all pointed at us, while our meager weaponry
finds nothing to aim at but a hysteresis, a rigid vacuity, a
Spook capable of smothering every spark in an ectoplasm of
information, a society of capitulation ruled by the image of
the Cop and the absorbant eye of the TV screen.

In short, we're not touting the TAZ as an exclusive end in
itself, replacing all other forms of organization, tactics,
and goals. We recommend it because it can provide the
quality of enhancement associated with the uprising without
necessarily leading to violence and martyrdom. The TAZ is
like an uprising which does not engage directly with the
State, a guerilla operation which liberates an area (of
land, of time, of imagination) and then dissolves itself to
re-form elsewhere/elsewhen, _before_ the State can crush it.
Because the State is concerned primarily with Simulation
rather than substance, the TAZ can "occupy" these areas
clandestinely and carry on its festal purposes for quite a
while in relative peace. Perhaps certain small TAZs have
lasted whole lifetimes because they went unnoticed, like
hillbilly enclaves--because they never intersected with the
Spectacle, never appeared outside that real life which is
invisible to the agents of Simulation.

Babylon takes its abstractions for realities; precisely
_within_ this margin of error the TAZ can come into
existence. Getting the TAZ started may involve tactics of
violence and defense, but its greatest strength lies in its
invisibility--the State cannot recognize it because History
has no definition of it. As soon as the TAZ is named
(represented, mediated), it must vanish, it _will_ vanish,
leaving behind it an empty husk, only to spring up again
somewhere else, once again invisible because undefinable in
terms of the Spectacle. The TAZ is thus a perfect tactic for
an era in which the State is omnipresent and all-powerful
and yet simultaneously riddled with cracks and vacancies.
And because the TAZ is a microcosm of that "anarchist dream"
of a free culture, I can think of no better tactic by which
to work toward that goal while at the same time experiencing
some of its benefits here and now.

In sum, realism demands not only that we give up _waiting_
for "the Revolution" but also that we give up _wanting_ it.
"Uprising," yes--as often as possible and even at the risk
of violence. The _spasming_ of the Simulated State will be
"spectacular," but in most cases the best and most radical
tactic will be to refuse to engage in spectacular violence,
to _withdraw_ from the area of simulation, to disappear.

The TAZ is an encampment of guerilla ontologists: strike and
run away. Keep moving the entire tribe, even if it's only
data in the Web. The TAZ must be capable of defense; but
both the "strike" and the "defense" should, if possible,
evade the violence of the State, which is no longer a
_meaningful_ violence. The strike is made at structures of
control, essentially at ideas; the defense is
"invisibility," a _martial_art_, and "invulnerability"--an
"occult" art within the martial arts. The "nomadic war
machine" conquers without being noticed and moves on before
the map can be adjusted. As to the future--Only the
autonomous can _plan_ autonomy, organize for it, create it.
It's a bootstrap operation. The first step is somewhat akin
to _satori_--the realization that the TAZ begins with a
simple act of realization.

(Note: See Appendix C, quote by Renzo Novatore)

The Psychotopology of Everyday Life

THE CONCEPT OF THE TAZ arises first out of a critique of
Revolution, and an appreciation of the Insurrection. The
former labels the latter a failure; but for us _uprising_
represents a far more interesting possibility, from the
standard of a psychology of liberation, than all the
"successful" revolutions of bourgeoisie, communists,
fascists, etc.

The second generating force behind the TAZ springs from the
historical development I call "the closure of the map." The
last bit of Earth unclaimed by any nation-state was eaten up
in 1899. Ours is the first century without
_terra_incognita_, without a frontier. Nationality is the
highest principle of world governance--not one speck of rock
in the South Seas can be left _open_, not one remote valley,
not even the Moon and planets. This is the apotheosis of
"territorial gangsterism." Not one square inch of Earth goes
unpoliced or untaxed...in theory.

The "map" is a political abstract grid, a gigantic _con_
enforced by the carrot/stick conditioning of the "Expert"
State, until for most of us the map _becomes_ the territory-
-no longer "Turtle Island," but "the USA." And yet because
the map is an abstraction it cannot cover Earth with 1:1
accuracy. Within the fractal complexities of actual
geography the map can see only dimensional grids. Hidden
enfolded immensities escape the measuring rod. The map is
not accurate; the map _cannot_ be accurate.

So--Revolution is closed, but insurgency is open. For the
time being we concentrate our force on temporary "power
surges," avoiding all entanglements with "permanent
solutions."

And--the map is closed, but the autonomous zone is open.
Metaphorically it unfolds within the fractal dimensions
invisible to the cartography of Control. And here we should
introduce the concept of psychotopology (and -topography) as
an alternative "science" to that of the State's surveying
and mapmaking and "psychic imperialism." Only
psychotopography can draw 1:1 maps of reality because only
the human mind provides sufficient complexity to model the
real. But a 1:1 map cannot "control" its territory because
it is virtually identical with its territory. It can only be
used to _suggest_, in a sense _gesture_towards_, certain
features. We are looking for "spaces" (geographic, social,
cultural, imaginal) with potential to flower as autonomous
zones--and we are looking for times in which these spaces
are relatively open, either through neglect on the part of
the State or because they have somehow escaped notice by the
mapmakers, or for whatever reason. Psychotopology is the art
of _dowsing_ for potential TAZs.

The closures of Revolution and of the map, however, are only
the negative sources of the TAZ; much remains to be said of
its positive inspirations. Reaction alone cannot provide the
energy needed to "manifest" a TAZ. An uprising must be _for_
something as well.

1. First, we can speak of a natural anthropology of the TAZ.
The nuclear family is the base unit of consensus society,
but not of the TAZ. ("Families!--how I hate them! the misers
of love!"--Gide) The nuclear family, with its attendant
"oedipal miseries," appears to have been a Neolithic
invention, a response to the "agricultural revolution" with
its imposed scarcity and its imposed hierarchy. The
Paleolithic model is at once more primal and more radical:
the _band_. The typical hunter/gatherer nomadic or semi-
nomadic band consists of about 50 people. Within larger
tribal societies the band-structure is fulfilled by clans
within the tribe, or by sodalities such as initiatic or
secret societies, hunt or war societies, gender societies,
"children's republics," and so on. If the nuclear family is
produced by scarcity (and results in miserliness), the band
is produced by abundance--and results in prodigality. The
family is _closed_, by genetics, by the male's _possession_
of women and children, by the hierarchic totality of
agricultural/industrial society. The band is _open_--not to
everyone, of course, but to the affinity group, the
initiates sworn to a bond of love. The band is not part of a
larger hierarchy, but rather part of a horizontal pattern of
custom, extended kinship, contract and alliance, spiritual
affinities, etc. (American Indian society preserves certain
aspects of this structure even now.)

In our own post-Spectacular Society of Simulation many
forces are working--largely invisibly--to phase out the
nuclear family and bring back the band. Breakdowns in the
structure of Work resonate in the shattered "stability" of
the unit-home and unit-family. One's "band" nowadays
includes friends, ex-spouses and lovers, people met at
different jobs and pow-wows, affinity groups, special
interest networks, mail networks, etc. The nuclear family
becomes more and more obviously a _trap_, a cultural
sinkhole, a neurotic secret implosion of split atoms--and
the obvious counter-strategy emerges spontaneously in the
almost unconscious rediscovery of the more archaic and yet
more post-industrial possibility of the band.

2. The TAZ as _festival_. Stephen Pearl Andrews once
offered, as an image of anarchist society, the
_dinner_party_, in which all structure of authority
dissolves in conviviality and celebration (see Appendix C).
Here we might also invoke Fourier and his concept of the
senses as the basis of social becoming--"touch-rut" and
"gastrosophy," and his paean to the neglected implications
of smell and taste. The ancient concepts of jubilee and
saturnalia originate in an intuition that certain events lie
outside the scope of "profane time," the measuring-rod of
the State and of History. These holidays literally occupied
gaps in the calendar--_intercalary_intervals_. By the Middle
Ages, nearly a third of the year was given over to holidays.
Perhaps the riots against calendar reform had less to do
with the "eleven lost days" than with a sense that imperial
science was conspiring to close up these gaps in the
calendar where the people's freedoms had accumulated--a coup
d'etat, a mapping of the year, a seizure of time itself,
turning the organic cosmos into a clockwork universe. The
death of the festival.

Participants in insurrection invariably note its festive
aspects, even in the midst of armed struggle, danger, and
risk. The uprising is like a saturnalia which has slipped
loose (or been forced to vanish) from its intercalary
interval and is now at liberty to pop up anywhere or when.
Freed of time and place, it nevertheless possesses a nose
for the ripeness of events, and an affinity for the
_genius_loci_; the science of psychotopology indicates
"flows of forces" and "spots of power" (to borrow occultist
metaphors) which localize the TAZ spatio-temporally, or at
least help to define its relation to moment and locale.

The media invite us to "come celebrate the moments of your
life" with the spurious unification of commodity and
spectacle, the famous _non-event_ of pure representation. In
response to this obscenity we have, on the one hand, the
spectrum of _refusal_ (chronicled by the Situationists, John
Zerzan, Bob Black _et_al_.)--and on the other hand, the
emergence of a _festal_culture_ removed and even hidden from
the would-be managers of our leisure. "Fight for the right
to party" is in fact not a parody of the radical struggle
but a new manifestation of it, appropriate to an age which
offers TVs and telephones as ways to "reach out and touch"
other human beings, ways to "Be There!"

Pearl Andrews was right: the dinner party is already "the
seed of the new society taking shape within the shell of the
old" (IWW Preamble). The sixties-style "tribal gathering,"
the forest conclave of eco-saboteurs, the idyllic Beltane of
the neo-pagans, anarchist conferences, gay faery
circles...Harlem rent parties of the twenties, nightclubs,
banquets, old-time libertarian picnics--we should realize
that all these are already "liberated zones" of a sort, or
at least potential TAZs. Whether open only to a few friends,
like a dinner party, or to thousands of celebrants, like a
Be-In, the party is always "open" because it is not
"ordered"; it may be planned, but unless it "_happens_" it's
a failure. The element of spontaneity is crucial.

The essence of the party: face-to-face, a group of humans
synergize their efforts to realize mutual desires, whether
for good food and cheer, dance, conversation, the arts of
life; perhaps even for erotic pleasure, or to create a
communal artwork, or to attain the very transport of bliss--
in short, a "union of egoists" (as Stirner put it) in its
simplest form--or else, in Kropotkin's terms, a basic
biological drive to "mutual aid." (Here we should also
mention Bataille's "economy of excess" and his theory of
potlatch culture.)

3. Vital in shaping TAZ reality is the concept of
_psychic_nomadism_ (or as we jokingly call it, "rootless
cosmopolitanism"). Aspects of this phenomenon have been
discussed by Deleuze and Guattari in
_Nomadology_and_the_War_Machine_, by Lyotard in _Driftworks_
and by various authors in the "Oasis" issue of
_Semiotext(e)_. We use the term "psychic nomadism" here
rather than "urban nomadism," "nomadology," "driftwork,"
etc., simply in order to garner all these concepts into a
single loose complex, to be studied in light of the coming-
into-being of the TAZ.
"The death of God," in some ways a de-centering of the
entire "European" project, opened a multi-perspectived post-
ideological worldview able to move "rootlessly" from
philosophy to tribal myth, from natural science to Taoism--
able to see for the first time through eyes like some golden
insect's, each facet giving a view of an entirely other
world.

But this vision was attained at the expense of inhabiting an
epoch where speed and "commodity fetishism" have created a
tyrannical false unity which tends to blur all cultural
diversity and individuality, so that "one place is as good
as another." This paradox creates "gypsies," psychic
travellers driven by desire or curiosity, wanderers with
shallow loyalties (in fact disloyal to the "European
Project" which has lost all its charm and vitality), not
tied down to any particular time and place, in search of
diversity and adventure...This description covers not only
the X-class artists and intellectuals but also migrant
laborers, refugees, the "homeless," tourists, the RV and
mobile-home culture--also people who "travel" via the Net,
but may never leave their own rooms (or those like Thoreau
who "have travelled much--in Concord"); and finally it
includes
"everybody," all of us, living through our automobiles, our
vacations, our TVs, books, movies, telephones, changing
jobs, changing "lifestyles," religions, diets, etc., etc.

Psychic nomadism as a _tactic_, what Deleuze & Guattari
metaphorically call "the war machine," shifts the paradox
from a passive to an active and perhaps even "violent" mode.
"God"'s last throes and deathbed rattles have been going on
for such a long time--in the form of Capitalism, Fascism,
and Communism, for example--that there's still a lot of
"creative destruction" to be carried out by post-Bakuninist
post-Nietzschean commandos or _apaches_ (literally
"enemies") of the old Consensus. These nomads practice the
_razzia_, they are corsairs, they are viruses; they have
both need and desire for TAZs, camps of black tents under
the desert stars,
interzones, hidden fortified oases along secret caravan
routes, "liberated" bits of jungle and bad-land, no-go
areas, black markets, and underground bazaars.

These nomads chart their courses by strange stars, which
might be luminous clusters of data in cyberspace, or perhaps
hallucinations. Lay down a map of the land; over that, set a
map of political change; over that, a map of the Net,
especially the counter-Net with its emphasis on clandestine
information-flow and logistics--and finally, over all, the
1:1 map of the creative imagination, aesthetics, values. The
resultant grid comes to life, animated by unexpected eddies
and surges of energy, coagulations of light, secret tunnels,
surprises.

The Net and the Web

THE NEXT FACTOR CONTRIBUTING to the TAZ is so vast and
ambiguous that it needs a section unto itself.

We've spoken of the _Net_, which can be defined as the
totality of all information and communication transfer. Some
of these transfers are privileged and limited to various
elites, which gives the Net a hierarchic aspect. Other
transactions are open to all--so the Net has a horizontal or
non-hierarchic aspect as well. Military and Intelligence
data are restricted, as are banking and currency information
and the like. But for the most part the telephone, the
postal system, public data banks, etc. are accessible to
everyone and anyone. Thus _within_the_Net_ there has begun
to emerge a shadowy sort of _counter-Net_, which we will
call the _Web_ (as if the Net were a fishing-net and the Web
were spider-webs woven through the interstices and broken
sections of the Net). Generally we'll use the term _Web_ to
refer to the alternate horizontal open structure of info-
exchange, the non-hierarchic network, and reserve the term
_counter-Net_ to indicate clandestine illegal and rebellious
use of the Web, including actual data-piracy and other forms
of leeching off the Net itself. Net, Web, and counter-Net
are all parts of the same whole pattern-complex--they blur
into each other at innumerable points. The terms are not
meant to define areas but to suggest tendencies.

(Digression: Before you condemn the Web or counter-Net for
its "parasitism," which can never be a truly revolutionary
force, ask yourself what "production" consists of in the Age
of Simulation. What is the "productive class"? Perhaps
you'll be forced to admit that these terms seem to have lost
their meaning. In any case the answers to such questions are
so complex that the TAZ tends to ignore them altogether and
simply picks up what it can _use_. "Culture is our Nature"--
and we are the thieving magpies, or the hunter/gatherers of
the world of CommTech.)

The present forms of the unofficial Web are, one must
suppose, still rather primitive: the marginal zine network,
the BBS networks, pirated software, hacking, phone-
phreaking, some influence in print and radio, almost none in
the other big media--no TV stations, no satellites, no fiber-
optics, no cable, etc., etc. However the Net itself presents
a pattern of changing/evolving relations between subjects
("users") and objects ("data"). The nature of these
relations has been exhaustively explored, from McLuhan to
Virilio. It would take pages and pages to "prove" what by
now "everyone knows." Rather than rehash it all, I am
interested in asking how these evolving relations suggest
modes of implementation for the TAZ.

The TAZ has a temporary but actual location in time and a
temporary but actual location in space. But clearly it must
also have "location" _in_the_Web_, and this location is of a
different sort, not actual but virtual, not immediate but
instantaneous. The Web not only provides logistical support
for the TAZ, it also helps to bring it into being; crudely
speaking one might say that the TAZ "exists" in information-
space as well as in the "real world." The Web can compact a
great deal of time, as data, into an infinitesimal "space."
We have noted that the TAZ, because it is temporary, must
necessarily lack some of the advantages of a freedom which
experiences _duration_ and a more-or-less fixed _locale_.
But the Web can provide a kind of substitute for some of
this duration and locale--it can _inform_ the TAZ, from its
inception, with vast amounts of compacted time and space
which have been "subtilized" as data.

At this moment in the evolution of the Web, and considering
our demands for the "face-to-face" and the sensual, we must
consider the Web primarily as a support system, capable of
carrying information from one TAZ to another, of defending
the TAZ, rendering it "invisible" or giving it teeth, as the
situation might demand. But more than that: If the TAZ is a
nomad camp, then the Web helps provide the epics, songs,
genealogies and legends of the tribe; it provides the secret
caravan routes and raiding trails which make up the
flowlines of tribal economy; it even _contains_ some of the
very roads they will follow, some of the very dreams they
will experience as signs and portents.

The Web does not depend for its existence on any computer
technology. Word-of-mouth, mail, the marginal zine network,
"phone trees," and the like already suffice to construct an
information webwork. The key is not the brand or level of
tech involved, but the openness and horizontality of the
structure. Nevertheless, the whole concept of the Net
_implies_ the use of computers. In the SciFi imagination the
Net is headed for the condition of Cyberspace (as in _Tron_
or _Neuromancer_) and the pseudo-telepathy of "virtual
reality." As a Cyberpunk fan I can't help but envision
"reality hacking" playing a major role in the creation of
TAZs. Like Gibson and Sterling I am assuming that the
official Net will never succeed in shutting down the Web or
the counter-Net--that data-piracy, unauthorized
transmissions and the free flow of information can never be
frozen. (In fact, as I understand it, chaos theory
_predicts_ that any universal Control-system is impossible.)

However, leaving aside all mere speculation about the
future, we must face a very serious question about the Web
and the tech it involves. The TAZ desires above all to avoid
_mediation_, to experience its existence as _immediate_. The
very essence of the affair is "breast-to-breast" as the
sufis say, or face-to-face. But, BUT: the very essence of
the Web is mediation. Machines here are our ambassadors--the
flesh is irrelevant except as a _terminal_, with all the
sinister connotations of the term.

The TAZ may perhaps best find its own space by wrapping its
head around two seemingly contradictory attitudes toward Hi-
Tech and its apotheosis the Net: (1) what we might call the
_Fifth Estate_/Neo-Paleolithic Post-Situ Ultra-Green
position, which construes itself as a luddite argument
against mediation and against the Net; and (2) the Cyberpunk
utopianists, futuro-libertarians, Reality Hackers and their
allies who see the Net as a step forward in evolution, and
who assume that any possible ill effects of mediation can be
overcome--at least, once we've liberated the means of
production.

The TAZ agrees with the hackers because it wants to come
into being--in part--through the Net, even through the
mediation of the Net. But it also agrees with the greens
because it retains intense awareness of itself as _body_ and
feels only revulsion for _CyberGnosis_, the attempt to
transcend the body through instantaneity and simulation. The
TAZ tends to view the Tech/anti-Tech dichotomy as
misleading, like most dichotomies, in which apparent
opposites turn out to be falsifications or even
hallucinations caused by semantics. This is a way of saying
that the TAZ wants to live in _this_ world, not in the idea
of another world, some visionary world born of false
unification (_all_ green OR _all_ metal) which can only be
more pie in the sky by-&-by (or as _Alice_ put it, "Jam
yesterday or jam tomorrow, but never jam today").

The TAZ is "utopian" in the sense that it envisions an
_intensification_ of everyday life, or as the Surrealists
might have said, life's penetration by the Marvelous. But it
cannot be utopian in the actual meaning of the word,
_nowhere_, or NoPlace Place. _The_TAZ_is_somewhere_. It lies
at the intersection of many forces, like some pagan power-
spot at the junction of mysterious ley-lines, visible to the
adept in seemingly unrelated bits of terrain, landscape,
flows of air, water, animals. But now the lines are not all
etched in time and space. Some of them exist only "within"
the Web, even though they also intersect with real times and
places. Perhaps some of the lines are "non-ordinary" in the
sense that no convention for quantifying them exists. These
lines might better be studied in the light of chaos science
than of sociology, statistics, economics, etc. The patterns
of force which bring the TAZ into being have something in
common with those chaotic "Strange Attractors" which exist,
so to speak, _between_ the dimensions.

The TAZ by its very nature seizes every available means to
realize itself--it will come to life whether in a cave or an
L-5 Space City--but above all it will live, now, or as soon
as possible, in however suspect or ramshackle a form,
spontaneously, without regard for ideology or even anti-
ideology. It will use the computer because the computer
exists, but it will also use powers which are so completely
unrelated to alienation or simulation that they guarantee a
certain
_psychic_paleolithism_ to the TAZ, a primordial-shamanic
spirit which will "infect" even the Net itself (the true
meaning of Cyberpunk as I read it). Because the TAZ is an
intensification, a surplus, an excess, a potlatch, life
spending itself in living rather than merely _surviving_
(that snivelling shibboleth of the eighties), it cannot be
defined either by Tech or anti-Tech. It contradicts itself
like a true despiser of hobgoblins, because it wills itself
to be, at any cost in damage to "perfection," to the
immobility of the final.

In the Mandelbrot Set and its computer-graphic realization
we watch--in a fractal universe--maps which are embedded and
in fact hidden within maps within maps etc. to the limits of
computational power. What is it _for_, this map which in a
sense bears a 1:1 relation with a fractal dimension? What
can one do with it, other than admire its psychedelic
elegance?
If we were to imagine an _information_map_--a cartographic
projection of the Net in its entirety--we would have to
include in it the features of chaos, which have already
begun to appear, for example, in the operations of complex
parallel processing, telecommunications, transfers of
electronic "money," viruses, guerilla hacking and so on.

Each of these "areas" of chaos could be represented by
topographs similar to the Mandelbrot Set, such that the
"peninsulas" are embedded or hidden within the map--such
that they seem to "disappear." This "writing"--parts of
which vanish, parts of which efface themselves--represents
the very process by which the Net is already compromised,
incomplete to its own view, ultimately un-Controllable. In
other words, the M Set, or something like it, might prove to
be useful in "plotting" (in all senses of the word) the
emergence of the counterNet as a chaotic process, a
"creative evolution" in Prigogine's term. If nothing else
the M Set serves as a _metaphor_ for a "mapping" of the
TAZ's interface with the Net as a
_disappearance_of_information_. Every "catastrophe" in the
Net is a node of power for the Web, the counter-Net. The Net
will be damaged by chaos, while the Web may thrive on it.

Whether through simple data-piracy, or else by a more
complex development of actual rapport with chaos, the Web-
hacker, the cybernetician of the TAZ, will find ways to take
advantage of perturbations, crashes, and breakdowns in the
Net (ways to make information out of "entropy"). As a
bricoleur, a scavenger of information shards, smuggler,
blackmailer, perhaps even cyberterrorist, the TAZ-hacker
will work for the evolution of clandestine fractal
connections. These connections, and the _different_
information that flows among and between them, will form
"power outlets" for the coming-into-being of the TAZ itself-
-as if one were to steal electricity from the energy-
monopoly to light an abandoned house for squatters.

Thus the Web, in order to produce situations conducive to
the TAZ, will parasitize the Net--but we can also conceive
of this strategy as an attempt to build toward the
construction of an alternative and autonomous Net, "free"
and no longer parasitic, which will serve as the basis for a
"new society emerging from the shell of the old." The
counter-Net and the TAZ can be considered, practically
speaking, as ends in themselves--but theoretically they can
also be viewed as forms of struggle toward a different
reality.

Having said this we must still admit to some qualms about
computers, some still unanswered questions, especially about
the Personal Computer.

The story of computer networks, BBSs and various other
experiments in electro-democracy has so far been one of
_hobbyism_ for the most part. Many anarchists and
libertarians have deep faith in the PC as a weapon of
liberation and self-liberation--but no real gains to show,
no palpable liberty.

I have little interest in some hypothetical emergent
entrepreneurial class of self-employed data/word processors
who will soon be able to carry on a vast cottage industry or
piecemeal shitwork for various corporations and
bureaucracies. Moreover it takes no ESP to foresee that this
"class" will develop its _under_class--a sort of lumpen
yuppetariat: housewives, for example, who will provide their
families with "second incomes" by turning their own homes
into electro-sweatshops, little Work-tyrannies where the
"boss" is a computer network.

Also I am not impressed by the sort of information and
services proffered by contemporary "radical" networks.
Somewhere--one is told--there exists an "information
economy." Maybe so; but the info being traded over the
"alternative" BBSs seems to consist entirely of chitchat and
techie-talk. Is this an economy? or merely a pastime for
enthusiasts? OK, PCs have created yet another "print
revolution"--OK, marginal webworks are evolving--OK, I can
now carry on six phone conversations at once. But what
difference has this made in my ordinary life?

Frankly, I already had plenty of data to enrich my
perceptions, what with books, movies, TV, theater,
telephones, the U.S. Postal Service, altered states of
consciousness, and so on. Do I really need a PC in order to
obtain yet more such data? You offer me _secret_
information? Well...perhaps I'm tempted--but still I demand
_marvelous_ secrets, not just unlisted telephone numbers or
the trivia of cops and politicians. Most of all I want
computers to provide me with information linked to
_real_goods_--"the good things in life," as the IWW Preamble
puts it. And here, since I'm accusing the hackers and BBSers
of irritating intellectual vagueness, I must myself descend
from the baroque clouds of Theory & Critique and explain
what I mean by "real goods."

Let's say that for both political and personal reasons I
desire good food, better than I can obtain from Capitalism--
unpolluted food still blessed with strong and natural
flavors. To complicate the game imagine that the food I
crave is illegal--raw milk perhaps, or the exquisite Cuban
fruit _mamey_, which cannot be imported fresh into the U.S.
because its seed is hallucinogenic (or so I'm told). I am
not a farmer. Let's pretend I'm an importer of rare perfumes
and aphrodisiacs, and sharpen the play by assuming most of
my stock is also illegal. Or maybe I only want to trade word
processing services for organic turnips, but refuse to
report the transaction to the IRS (as required by law,
believe it or not). Or maybe I want to meet other humans for
consensual but illegal acts of mutual pleasure (this has
actually been tried, but all the hard-sex BBSs have been
busted--and what use is an underground with
_lousy_security_?). In short, assume that I'm fed up with
mere information, the ghost in the machine. According to
you, computers should already be quite capable of
facilitating my desires for food, drugs, sex, tax evasion.
So what's the matter? Why isn't it happening?

The TAZ has occurred, is occurring, and will occur with or
without the computer. But for the TAZ to reach its full
potential it must become less a matter of spontaneous
combustion and more a matter of "islands in the Net." The
Net, or rather the counter-Net, assumes the promise of an
integral aspect of the TAZ, an addition that will multiply
its potential, a "quantum jump" (odd how this expression has
come to mean a _big_ leap) in complexity and significance.
The TAZ must now exist within a world of pure space, the
world of the senses. Liminal, even evanescent, the TAZ must
combine information and desire in order to fulfill its
adventure (its "happening"), in order to fill itself to the
borders of its destiny, to saturate itself with its own
becoming.

Perhaps the Neo-Paleolithic School are correct when they
assert that all forms of alienation and mediation must be
destroyed or abandoned before our goals can be realized--or
perhaps true anarchy will be realized only in Outer Space,
as some futuro-libertarians assert. But the TAZ does not
concern itself very much with "was" or "will be." The TAZ is
interested in results, successful raids on consensus
reality, breakthroughs into more intense and more abundant
life. If the computer cannot be used in this project, then
the computer will have to be overcome. My intuition however
suggests that the counter-Net is already coming into being,
perhaps already exists--but I cannot prove it. I've based
the theory of the TAZ in large part on this intuition. Of
course the Web also involves non-computerized networks of
exchange such as samizdat, the black market, etc.--but the
full potential of non-hierarchic information networking
logically leads to the computer as the tool par excellence.
Now I'm waiting for the hackers to prove I'm right, that my
intuition is valid. Where are my turnips?

"Gone to Croatan"

WE HAVE NO DESIRE to define the TAZ or to elaborate dogmas
about how it _must_ be created. Our contention is rather
that it has been created, will be created, and is being
created. Therefore it would prove more valuable and
interesting to look at some TAZs past and present, and to
speculate about future manifestations; by evoking a few
prototypes we may be able to gauge the potential scope of
the complex, and perhaps even get a glimpse of an
"archetype." Rather than attempt any sort of encyclopaedism
we'll adopt a scatter-shot technique, a mosaic of glimpses,
beginning quite arbitrarily with the 16th-17th centuries and
the settlement of the New World.

The opening of the "new" world was conceived from the start
as an _occultist_operation_. The magus John Dee, spiritual
advisor to Elizabeth I, seems to have invented the concept
of "magical imperialism" and infected an entire generation
with it. Halkyut and Raleigh fell under his spell, and
Raleigh used his connections with the "School of Night"--a
cabal of advanced thinkers, aristocrats, and adepts--to
further the causes of exploration, colonization and
mapmaking. _The_Tempest_ was a propaganda-piece for the new
ideology, and the Roanoke Colony was its first showcase
experiment.

The alchemical view of the New World associated it with
_materia_prima_ or _hyle_, the "state of Nature," innocence
and all-possibility ("Virgin-ia"), a chaos or inchoateness
which the adept would transmute into "gold," that is, into
spiritual perfection _as_well_as_ material abundance.
But this alchemical vision is also informed in part by an
actual fascination with the inchoate, a sneaking sympathy
for it, a feeling of yearning for its formless form which
took the symbol of the "Indian" for its focus: "Man" _in_
the state of nature, uncorrupted by "government." Caliban,
the Wild Man, is lodged like a virus in the very machine of
Occult Imperialism; the forest/animal/humans are invested
from the very start with the magic power of the marginal,
despised and outcaste. On the one hand Caliban is ugly, and
Nature a "howling wilderness"--on the other, Caliban is
noble and unchained, and Nature an Eden. This split in
European consciousness predates the Romantic/Classical
dichotomy; it's rooted in Renaissance High Magic. The
discovery of America (Eldorado, the Fountain of Youth)
crystallized it; and it precipitated in actual schemes for
colonization.

We were taught in elementary school that the first
settlements in Roanoke failed; the colonists disappeared,
leaving behind them only the cryptic message "Gone To
Croatan." Later reports of "grey-eyed Indians" were
dismissed as legend. What really happened, the textbook
implied, was that the Indians massacred the defenseless
settlers. However, "Croatan" was not some Eldorado; it was
the name of a neighboring tribe of friendly Indians.
Apparently the settlement was simply moved back from the
coast into the Great Dismal Swamp and absorbed into the
tribe. And the grey-eyed Indians were real--they're
_still_there_, and they still call themselves Croatans.

So--the very first colony in the New World chose to renounce
its contract with Prospero (Dee/Raleigh/Empire) and go over
to the Wild Men with Caliban. They dropped out. They became
"Indians," "went native," opted for chaos over the appalling
miseries of serfing for the plutocrats and intellectuals of
London.

As America came into being where once there had been "Turtle
Island," Croatan remained embedded in its collective psyche.
Out beyond the frontier, the state of Nature (i.e. no State)
still prevailed--and within the consciousness of the
settlers the option of wildness always lurked, the
temptation to give up on Church, farmwork, literacy, taxes--
all the burdens of civilization--and "go to Croatan" in some
way or another. Moreover, as the Revolution in England was
betrayed, first by Cromwell and then by Restoration, waves
of Protestant radicals fled or were transported to the New
World (which had now become a _prison_, a place of _exile_).
Antinomians, Familists, rogue Quakers, Levellers, Diggers,
and Ranters were now introduced to the occult shadow of
wildness, and rushed to embrace it.

Anne Hutchinson and her friends were only the best known
(i.e. the most upper-class) of the Antinomians--having had
the bad luck to be caught up in Bay Colony politics--but a
much more radical wing of the movement clearly existed. The
incidents Hawthorne relates in "The Maypole of Merry Mount"
are thoroughly historical; apparently the extremists had
decided to renounce Christianity altogether and revert to
paganism. If they had succeeded in uniting with their Indian
allies the result might have been an
Antinomian/Celtic/Algonquin syncretic religion, a sort of
17th century North American _Santeria_.

Sectarians were able to thrive better under the looser and
more corrupt administrations in the Caribbean, where rival
European interests had left many islands deserted or even
unclaimed. Barbados and Jamaica in particular must have been
settled by many extremists, and I believe that Levellerish
and Ranterish influences contributed to the Buccaneer
"utopia" on Tortuga. Here for the first time, thanks to
Esquemelin, we can study a successful New World proto-TAZ in
some depth. Fleeing from hideous "benefits" of Imperialism
such as slavery, serfdom, racism and intolerance, from the
tortures of impressment and the living death of the
plantations, the Buccaneers adopted Indian ways,
intermarried with Caribs, accepted blacks and Spaniards as
equals, rejected all nationality, elected their captains
democratically, and reverted to the "state of Nature."
Having declared themselves "at war with all the world," they
sailed forth to plunder under mutual contracts called
"Articles" which were so egalitarian that every member
received a full share and the Captain usually only 1 1/4 or
1 1/2 shares. Flogging and punishments were forbidden--
quarrels were settled by vote or by the code duello.

It is simply wrong to brand the pirates as mere sea-going
highwaymen or even proto-capitalists, as some historians
have done. In a sense they were "social bandits," although
their base communities were not traditional peasant
societies but "utopias" created almost ex nihilo in terra
incognita, enclaves of total liberty occupying empty spaces
on the map. After the fall of Tortuga, the Buccaneer ideal
remained alive all through the "Golden Age" of Piracy (ca.
1660-1720), and resulted in land-settlements in Belize, for
example, which was founded by Buccaneers. Then, as the scene
shifted to Madagascar--an island still unclaimed by any
imperial power and ruled only by a patchwork of native kings
(chiefs) eager for pirate allies--the Pirate Utopia reached
its highest form.

Defoe's account of Captain Mission and the founding of
Libertatia may be, as some historians claim, a literary hoax
meant to propagandize for radical Whig theory--but it was
embedded in _The_General_History_of_the_Pyrates_ (1724-28),
most of which is still accepted as true and accurate.
Moreover the story of Capt. Mission was not criticized when
the book appeared and many old Madagascar hands still
survived. _They_ seem to have believed it, no doubt because
they had experienced pirate enclaves very much like
Libertatia. Once again, rescued slaves, natives, and even
traditional enemies such as the Portuguese were all invited
to join as equals. (Liberating slave ships was a major
preoccupation.) Land was held in common, representatives
elected for short terms, booty shared; doctrines of liberty
were preached far more radical than even those of
_Common_Sense_.

Libertatia hoped to endure, and Mission died in its defense.
But most of the pirate utopias were meant to be temporary;
in fact the corsairs' true "republics" were their ships,
which sailed under Articles. The shore enclaves usually had
no law at all. The last classic example, Nassau in the
Bahamas, a beachfront resort of shacks and tents devoted to
wine, women (and probably boys too, to judge by Birge's
_Sodomy_and_Piracy_), song (the pirates were inordinately
fond of music and used to hire on bands for entire cruises),
and wretched excess, vanished overnight when the British
fleet appeared in the Bay. Blackbeard and "Calico Jack"
Rackham and his crew of pirate women moved on to wilder
shores and nastier fates, while others meekly accepted the
Pardon and reformed. But the Buccaneer tradition lasted,
both in Madagascar where the mixed-blood children of the
pirates began to carve out kingdoms of their own, and in the
Caribbean, where escaped slaves as well as mixed
black/white/red groups were able to thrive in the mountains
and backlands as "Maroons." The Maroon community in Jamaica
still retained a degree of autonomy and many of the old
folkways when Zora Neale Hurston visited there in the 1920's
(see _Tell_My_Horse_). The Maroons of Suriname still
practice African "paganism."

Throughout the 18th century, North America also produced a
number of drop-out "tri-racial isolate communities." (This
clinical-sounding term was invented by the Eugenics
Movement, which produced the first scientific studies of
these communities. Unfortunately the "science" merely served
as an excuse for hatred of racial "mongrels" and the poor,
and the "solution to the problem" was usually forced
sterilization.) The nuclei invariably consisted of runaway
slaves and serfs, "criminals" (i.e. the very poor),
"prostitutes" (i.e. white women who married non-whites), and
members of various native tribes. In some cases, such as the
Seminole and Cherokee, the traditional tribal structure
absorbed the newcomers; in other cases, new tribes were
formed. Thus we have the Maroons of the Great Dismal Swamp,
who persisted through the 18th and 19th centuries, adopting
runaway slaves, functioning as a way station on the
Underground Railway, and serving as a religious and
ideological center for slave rebellions. The religion was
HooDoo, a mixture of African, native, and Christian
elements, and according to the historian H. Leaming-Bey the
elders of the faith and the leaders of the Great Dismal
Maroons were known as "the Seven Finger High Glister."

The Ramapaughs of northern New Jersey (incorrectly known as
the "Jackson Whites") present another romantic and
archetypal genealogy: freed slaves of the Dutch poltroons,
various Delaware and Algonquin clans, the usual
"prostitutes," the "Hessians" (a catch-phrase for lost
British mercenaries, drop-out Loyalists, etc.), and local
bands of social bandits such as Claudius Smith's.

An African-Islamic origin is claimed by some of the groups,
such as the Moors of Delaware and the Ben Ishmaels, who
migrated from Kentucky to Ohio in the mid-18th century. The
Ishmaels practiced polygamy, never drank alcohol, made their
living as minstrels, intermarried with Indians and adopted
their customs, and were so devoted to nomadism that they
built their houses on wheels. Their annual migration
triangulated on frontier towns with names like Mecca and
Medina. In the 19th century some of them espoused anarchist
ideals, and they were targeted by the Eugenicists for a
particularly vicious pogrom of salvation-by-extermination.
Some of the earliest Eugenics laws were passed in their
honor. As a tribe they "disappeared" in the 1920's, but
probably swelled the ranks of early "Black Islamic" sects
such as the Moorish Science Temple.
I myself grew up on legends of the "Kallikaks" of the nearby
New Jersey Pine Barrens (and of course on Lovecraft, a rabid
racist who was fascinated by the isolate communities). The
legends turned out to be folk-memories of the slanders of
the Eugenicists, whose U.S. headquarters were in Vineland,
NJ, and who undertook the usual "reforms" against
"miscegenation" and "feeblemindedness" in the Barrens
(including the publication of photographs of the Kallikaks,
crudely and obviously retouched to make them look like
monsters of misbreeding).

The "isolate communities"--at least, those which have
retained their identity into the 20th century--consistently
refuse to be absorbed into either mainstream culture or the
black "subculture" into which modern sociologists prefer to
categorize them. In the 1970's, inspired by the Native
American renaissance, a number of groups--including the
Moors and the Ramapaughs--applied to the B.I.A. for
recognition as _Indian_tribes_. They received support from
native activists but were refused official status. If they'd
won, after all, it might have set a dangerous precedent for
drop-outs of all sorts, from "white Peyotists" and hippies
to black nationalists, aryans, anarchists and libertarians--
a "reservation" for anyone and everyone! The "European
Project" cannot recognize the existence of the Wild Man--
green chaos is still too much of a threat to the imperial
dream of order.

Essentially the Moors and Ramapaughs rejected the
"diachronic" or historical explanation of their origins in
favor of a "synchronic" self-identity based on a "myth" of
Indian adoption. Or to put it another way,
_they_named_themselves_"Indians."_ If everyone who wished
"to be an Indian" could accomplish this by an act of self-
naming, imagine what a departure to Croatan would take
place. That old occult shadow still haunts the remnants of
our forests (which, by the way, have greatly increased in
the Northeast since the 18-19th century as vast tracts of
farmland return to scrub. Thoreau on his deathbed dreamed of
the return of "...Indians...forests...": the return of the
repressed).

The Moors and Ramapaughs of course have good materialist
reasons to think of themselves as Indians--after all, they
have Indian ancestors--but if we view their self-naming in
"mythic" as well as historical terms we'll learn more of
relevance to our quest for the TAZ. Within tribal societies
there exist what some anthropologists call _mannenbunden_:
totemic societies devoted to an identity with "Nature" in
the act of shapeshifting, of _becoming_ the totem-animal
(werewolves, jaguar shamans, leopard men, cat-witches,
etc.). In the context of an entire colonial society (as
Taussig points out in
_Shamanism,_Colonialism_and_the_Wild_Man_) the shapeshifting
power is seen as inhering in the native culture as a whole--
thus the most repressed sector of the society acquires a
paradoxical power through the myth of its occult knowledge,
which is feared and desired by the colonist. Of course the
natives really do have certain occult knowledge; but in
response to Imperial perception of native culture as a kind
of "spiritual wild(er)ness," the natives come to see
themselves more and more consciously in that role. Even as
they are marginalized, the _Margin_ takes on an aura of
magic. Before the whiteman, they were simply tribes of
people--now, they are "guardians of Nature," inhabitants of
the "state of Nature." Finally the colonist himself is
seduced by this "myth." Whenever an American wants to drop
out or back into Nature, invariably he "becomes an Indian."
The Massachusetts radical democrats (spiritual descendents
of the radical Protestants) who organized the Tea Party, and
who literally believed that governments could be abolished
(the whole Berkshire region declared itself in a "state of
Nature"!), disguised themselves as "Mohawks." Thus the
colonists, who suddenly saw themselves marginalized vis-.-
vis the motherland, adopted the role of the marginalized
natives, thereby (in a sense) seeking to participate in
their occult power, their mythic radiance. From the Mountain
Men to the Boy Scouts, the dream of "becoming an Indian"
flows beneath myriad strands of American history, culture
and consciousness.

The sexual imagery connected to "tri-racial" groups also
bears out this hypothesis. "Natives" of course are always
immoral, but racial renegades and drop-outs must be
downright polymorphous-perverse. The Buccaneers were
buggers, the Maroons and Mountain Men were miscegenists, the
"Jukes and Kallikaks" indulged in fornication and incest
(leading to mutations such as polydactyly), the children ran
around naked and masturbated openly, etc., etc. Reverting to
a "state of Nature" paradoxically seems to allow for the
practice of every "_un_natural" act; or so it would appear
if we believe the Puritans and Eugenicists. And since many
people in repressed moralistic racist societies secretly
desire exactly these licentious acts, they project them
outwards onto the marginalized, and thereby convince
themselves that they themselves remain civilized and pure.
And in fact some marginalized communities do really reject
consensus morality--the pirates certainly did!--and no doubt
actually act out some of civilization's repressed desires.
(_Wouldn't_you?_) Becoming "wild" is always an erotic act,
an act of nakedness.
Before leaving the subject of the "tri-racial isolates," I'd
like to recall Nietzsche's enthusiasm for "race mixing."
Impressed by the vigor and beauty of hybrid cultures, he
offered miscegenation not only as a solution to the problem
of race but also as the principle for a new humanity freed
of ethnic and national chauvinism--a precursor to the
"psychic nomad," perhaps. Nietzsche's dream still seems as
remote now as it did to him. Chauvinism still rules OK.
Mixed cultures remain submerged. But the autonomous zones of
the Buccaneers and Maroons, Ishmaels and Moors, Ramapaughs
and "Kallikaks" remain, or their stories remain, as
indications of what Nietzsche might have called "the Will to
Power as Disappearance." We must return to this theme.

Music as an Organizational Principle

MEANWHILE, HOWEVER, WE TURN to the history of classical
anarchism in the light of the TAZ concept.

Before the "closure of the map," a good deal of anti-
authoritarian energy went into "escapist" communes such as
Modern Times, the various Phalansteries, and so on.
Interestingly, some of them were not intended to last
"forever," but only as long as the project proved
fulfilling. By Socialist/Utopian standards these experiments
were "failures," and therefore we know little about them.

When escape beyond the frontier proved impossible, the era
of revolutionary urban Communes began in Europe. The
Communes of Paris, Lyons and Marseilles did not survive long
enough to take on any characteristics of permanence, and one
wonders if they were meant to. From our point of view the
chief matter of fascination is the _spirit_ of the Communes.
During and after these years anarchists took up the practice
of revolutionary nomadism, drifting from uprising to
uprising, looking to keep alive in themselves the intensity
of spirit they experienced in the moment of insurrection. In
fact, certain anarchists of the Stirnerite/Nietzschean
strain came to look on this activity as an end in itself, a
way of _always_occupying_an_autonomous_zone_, the interzone
which opens up in the midst or wake of war and revolution
(cf. Pynchon's "zone" in _Gravity's_Rainbow_). They declared
that if any socialist revolution _succeeded_, they'd be the
first to turn against it. Short of universal anarchy they
had no intention of ever stopping. In Russia in 1917 they
greeted the free Soviets with joy: _this_ was their goal.
But as soon as the Bolsheviks betrayed the Revolution, the
individualist anarchists were the first to go back on the
warpath. After Kronstadt, of course, _all_ anarchists
condemned the "Soviet Union" (a contradiction in terms) and
moved on in search of new insurrections.

Makhno's Ukraine and anarchist Spain were meant to have
_duration_, and despite the exigencies of continual war both
succeeded to a certain extent: not that they lasted a "long
time," but they were successfully organized and could have
persisted if not for outside aggression. Therefore, from
among the experiments of the inter-War period I'll
concentrate instead on the madcap Republic of Fiume, which
is much less well known, and was _not_ meant to endure.
Gabriele D'Annunzio, Decadent poet, artist, musician,
aesthete, womanizer, pioneer daredevil aeronautist, black
magician, genius and cad, emerged from World War I as a hero
with a small army at his beck and command: the "Arditi." At
a loss for adventure, he decided to capture the city of
Fiume from Yugoslavia and _give_ it to Italy. After a
necromantic ceremony with his mistress in a cemetery in
Venice he set out to conquer Fiume, and succeeded without
any trouble to speak of. But Italy turned down his generous
offer; the Prime Minister called him a fool.
In a huff, D'Annunzio decided to declare independence and
see how long he could get away with it. He and one of his
anarchist friends wrote the Constitution, which declared
_music_to_be_the_central_principle_of_the_State_. The Navy
(made up of deserters and Milanese anarchist maritime
unionists) named themselves the _Uscochi_, after the long-
vanished pirates who once lived on local offshore islands
and preyed on Venetian and Ottoman shipping. The modern
Uscochi succeeded in some wild coups: several rich Italian
merchant vessels suddenly gave the Republic a future: money
in the coffers! Artists, bohemians, adventurers, anarchists
(D'Annunzio corresponded with Malatesta), fugitives and
Stateless refugees, homosexuals, military dandies (the
uniform was black with pirate skull-&-crossbones--later
stolen by the SS), and crank reformers of every stripe
(including Buddhists, Theosophists and Vedantists) began to
show up at Fiume in droves. The party never stopped. Every
morning D'Annunzio read poetry and manifestos from his
balcony; every evening a concert, then fireworks. This made
up the entire activity of the government. Eighteen months
later, when the wine and money had run out and the Italian
fleet _finally_ showed up and lobbed a few shells at the
Municipal Palace, no one had the energy to resist.

D'Annunzio, like many Italian anarchists, later veered
toward fascism--in fact, Mussolini (the ex-Syndicalist)
himself seduced the poet along that route. By the time
D'Annunzio realized his error it was too late: he was too
old and sick. But Il Duce had him killed anyway--pushed off
a balcony--and turned him into a "martyr." As for Fiume,
though it lacked the _seriousness_ of the free Ukraine or
Barcelona, it can probably teach us more about certain
aspects of our quest. It was in some ways the last of the
pirate utopias (or the only modern example)--in other ways,
perhaps, it was very nearly the first modern TAZ.

I believe that if we compare Fiume with the Paris uprising
of 1968 (also the Italian urban insurrections of the early
seventies), as well as with the American countercultural
communes and their anarcho-New Left influences, we should
notice certain similarities, such as:--the importance of
aesthetic theory (cf. the Situationists)--also, what might
be called "pirate economics," living high off the surplus of
social overproduction--even the popularity of colorful
military uniforms--and the concept of _music_ as
revolutionary social change--and finally their shared air of
impermanence, of being ready to move on, shape-shift, re-
locate to other universities, mountaintops, ghettos,
factories, safe houses, abandoned farms--or even other
planes of reality. No one was trying to impose yet another
Revolutionary Dictatorship, either at Fiume, Paris, or
Millbrook. Either the world would change, or it wouldn't.
Meanwhile keep on the move and _live_intensely_.

The Munich Soviet (or "Council Republic") of 1919 exhibited
certain features of the TAZ, even though--like most
revolutions--its stated goals were not exactly "temporary."
Gustav Landauer's participation as Minister of Culture along
with Silvio Gesell as Minister of Economics and other anti-
authoritarian and extreme libertarian socialists such as the
poet/playwrights Erich M hsam and Ernst Toller, and Ret
Marut (the novelist B. Traven), gave the Soviet a distinct
anarchist flavor. Landauer, who had spent years of isolation
working on his grand synthesis of Nietzsche, Proudhon,
Kropotkin, Stirner, Meister Eckhardt, the radical mystics,
and the Romantic _volk_-philosophers, knew from the start
that the Soviet was doomed; he hoped only that it would last
long enough to be _understood_. Kurt Eisner, the martyred
founder of the Soviet, believed quite literally that poets
and poetry should form the basis of the revolution. Plans
were launched to devote a large piece of Bavaria to an
experiment in anarcho-socialist economy and community.
Landauer drew up proposals for a Free School system and a
People's Theater. Support for the Soviet was more or less
confined to the poorest working-class and bohemian
neighborhoods of Munich, and to groups like the Wandervogel
(the neo-Romantic youth movement), Jewish radicals (like
Buber), the Expressionists, and other marginals. Thus
historians dismiss it as the "Coffeehouse Republic" and
belittle its significance in comparison with Marxist and
Spartacist participation in Germany's post-War
revolution(s). Outmaneuvered by the Communists and
eventually murdered by soldiers under the influence of the
occult/fascist Thule Society, Landauer deserves to be
remembered as a saint. Yet even anarchists nowadays tend to
misunderstand and condemn him for "selling out" to a
"socialist government." If the Soviet had lasted even a
year, we would weep at the mention of its beauty--but before
even the first flowers of that Spring had wilted, the
_geist_ and the spirit of poetry were crushed, and we have
forgotten. Imagine what it must have been to breathe the air
of a city in which the Minister of Culture has just
predicted that schoolchildren will soon be memorizing the
works of Walt Whitman. Ah for a time machine...

The Will to Power as Disappearance

FOUCAULT, BAUDRILLARD, _ET_AL_. have discussed various modes
of "disappearance" at great length. Here I wish to suggest
that the TAZ is in some sense a _tactic_of_disappearance_.
When the Theorists speak of the disappearance of the Social
they mean in part the impossibility of the "Social
Revolution," and in part the impossibility of "the State"--
the abyss of power, the end of the discourse of power. The
anarchist question in this case should then be: Why _bother_
to confront a "power" which has lost all meaning and become
sheer Simulation? Such confrontations will only result in
dangerous and ugly spasms of violence by the emptyheaded
shit-for-brains who've inherited the keys to all the
armories and prisons. (Perhaps this is a crude american
misunderstanding of sublime and subtle Franco-Germanic
Theory. If so, fine; whoever said _understanding_ was needed
to make use of an idea?)

As I read it, disappearance seems to be a very logical
radical option for our time, not at all a disaster or death
for the radical project. Unlike the morbid deathfreak
nihilistic interpretation of Theory, mine intends to _mine_
it for useful strategies in the always-ongoing "revolution
of everyday life": the struggle that cannot cease even with
the last failure of political or social revolution because
nothing except the end of the world can bring an end to
everyday life, nor to our aspirations for the _good_things_,
for the Marvelous. And as Nietzsche said, if the world
_could_ come to an end, logically it would have done so; it
has not, so it _does_not_. And so, as one of the sufis said,
no matter how many draughts of forbidden wine we drink, we
will carry this raging thirst into eternity.

Zerzan and Black have independently noted certain "elements
of Refusal" (Zerzan's term) which perhaps can be seen as
somehow symptomatic of a radical culture of disappearance,
partly unconscious but partly conscious, which influences
far more people than any leftist or anarchist _idea_. These
gestures are made _against_ institutions, and in that sense
are "negative"--but each negative gesture also suggests a
"positive" tactic to replace rather than merely refuse the
despised institution.

For example, the negative gesture against _schooling_ is
"voluntary illiteracy." Since I do not share the liberal
worship of literacy for the sake of social ameliorization, I
cannot quite share the gasps of dismay heard everywhere at
this phenomenon: I sympathize with children who refuse books
along with the garbage in the books. There are however
positive alternatives which make use of the same energy of
disappearance. Home-schooling and craft-apprenticeship, like
truancy, result in an absence from the prison of school.
Hacking is another form of "education" with certain features
of "invisibility."

A mass-scale negative gesture against politics consists
simply of not voting. "Apathy" (i.e. a healthy boredom with
the weary Spectacle) keeps over half the nation from the
polls; anarchism never accomplished as much! (Nor did
anarchism have anything to do with the failure of the recent
Census.) Again, there are positive parallels: "networking"
as an alternative to politics is practiced at many levels of
society, and non-hierarchic organization has attained
popularity even outside the anarchist movement, simply
because it _works_. (ACT UP and Earth First! are two
examples. Alcoholics Anonymous, oddly enough, is another.)

Refusal of _Work_ can take the forms of absenteeism, on-job
drunkenness, sabotage, and sheer inattention--but it can
also give rise to new modes of rebellion: more self-
employment, participation in the "black" economy and
"_lavoro_nero_," welfare scams and other criminal options,
pot farming, etc.--all more or less "invisible" activities
compared to traditional leftist confrontational tactics such
as the general strike.

Refusal of the _Church_? Well, the "negative gesture" here
probably consists of...watching television. But the positive
alternatives include all sorts of non-authoritarian forms of
spirituality, from "unchurched" Christianity to neo-
paganism. The "Free Religions" as I like to call them--
small, self-created, half-serious/half-fun cults influenced
by such currents as Discordianism and anarcho-Taoism--are to
be found all over marginal America, and provide a growing
"fourth way" outside the mainstream churches, the
televangelical bigots, and New Age vapidity and consumerism.
It might also be said that the chief refusal of orthodoxy
consists of the construction of "private moralities" in the
Nietzschean sense: the spirituality of "free spirits."

The negative refusal of _Home_ is "homelessness," which most
consider a form of victimization, not wishing to be _forced_
into nomadology. But "homelessness" can in a sense be a
virtue, an adventure--so it appears, at least, to the huge
international movement of the squatters, our modern hobos.

The negative refusal of the _Family_ is clearly divorce, or
some other symptom of "breakdown." The positive alternative
springs from the realization that life can be happier
without the nuclear family, whereupon a hundred flowers
bloom--from single parentage to group marriage to erotic
affinity group. The "European Project" fights a major
rearguard action in defense of "Family"--oedipal misery lies
at the heart of Control. Alternatives exist--but they must
remain in hiding, especially since the War against Sex of
the 1980's and 1990's.

What is the refusal of _Art_? The "negative gesture" is not
to be found in the silly nihilism of an "Art Strike" or the
defacing of some famous painting--it is to be seen in the
almost universal glassy-eyed boredom that creeps over most
people at the very mention of the word. But what would the
"positive gesture" consist of? Is it possible to imagine an
aesthetics that does not _engage_, that removes itself from
History and even from the Market? or at least _tends_ to do
so? which wants to replace representation with _presence_?
How does presence make itself felt even in (or through)
representation?

"Chaos Linguistics" traces a presence which is continually
disappearing from all orderings of language and meaning-
systems; an elusive presence, evanescent, _latif_ ("subtle,"
a term in sufi alchemy)--the Strange Attractor around which
memes accrue, chaotically forming new and spontaneous
orders. Here we have an aesthetics of the borderland between
chaos and order, the margin, the area of "catastrophe" where
the breakdown of the system can equal enlightenment. (Note:
for an explanation of "Chaos Linguistics" see Appendix A,
then please read this paragraph again.)

The disappearance of the artist IS "the suppression and
realization of art," in Situationist terms. But from where
do we vanish? And are we ever seen or heard of again? We go
to Croatan--what's our fate? All our art consists of a
goodbye note to history--"Gone To Croatan"--but where is it,
and what will we _do_ there?

First: We're not talking here about literally vanishing from
the world and its future:--no escape backward in time to
paleolithic "original leisure society"--no forever utopia,
no backmountain hideaway, no island; also, no post-
Revolutionary utopia--most likely no Revolution at all!--
also, no VONU, no anarchist Space Stations--nor do we accept
a "Baudrillardian disappearance" into the silence of an
ironic hyperconformity. I have no quarrel with any Rimbauds
who escape Art for whatever Abyssinia they can find. But we
can't build an aesthetics, even an aesthetics of
disappearance, on the simple act of _never_coming_back_. By
saying we're not an avant-garde and that there is no avant-
garde, we've written our "Gone To Croatan"--the question
then becomes, how to envision "everyday life" in Croatan?
particularly if we cannot say that Croatan exists in Time
(Stone Age or Post-Revolution) or Space, either as utopia or
as some forgotten midwestern town or as Abyssinia? Where and
when is the world of unmediated creativity? If it _can_
exist, it _does_ exist--but perhaps only as a sort of
alternate reality which we so far have not learned to
perceive. Where would we look for the seeds--the weeds
cracking through our sidewalks--from this other world into
our world? the clues, the right directions for searching? a
finger pointing at the moon?

I believe, or would at least like to propose, that the only
solution to the "suppression and realization" of Art lies in
the emergence of the TAZ. I would strongly reject the
criticism that the TAZ itself is "nothing but" a work of
art, although it may have some of the trappings. I do
suggest that the TAZ is the only possible "time" and "place"
for art to happen for the sheer pleasure of creative play,
and as an actual contribution to the forces which allow the
TAZ to cohere and manifest.

Art in the World of Art has become a commodity; but deeper
than that lies the problem of _re-presentation_ itself, and
the refusal of all _mediation_. In the TAZ art as a
commodity will simply become impossible; it will instead be
a condition of life. Mediation is harder to overcome, but
the removal of all barriers between artists and "users" of
art will tend toward a condition in which (as A.K.
Coomaraswamy described it) "the artist is not a special sort
of person, but every person is a special sort of artist."

In sum: disappearance is not necessarily a "catastrophe"--
except in the mathematical sense of "a sudden topological
change." All the _positive_gestures_ sketched here seem to
involve various degrees of invisibility rather than
traditional revolutionary confrontation. The "New Left"
never really believed in its own existence till it saw
itself on the Evening News. The New Autonomy, by contrast,
will either infiltrate the media and subvert "it" from
within--or else never be "seen" at all. The TAZ exists not
only beyond Control but also beyond definition, beyond
gazing and naming as acts of enslaving, beyond the
understanding of the State, beyond the State's ability to
_see_.

Ratholes in the Babylon of Information

THE TAZ AS A CONSCIOUS radical tactic will emerge under
certain conditions:

1. Psychological liberation. That is, we must realize (make
real) the moments and spaces in which freedom is not only
possible but _actual_. We must know in what ways we are
genuinely oppressed, and also in what ways we are self-
repressed or ensnared in a fantasy in which _ideas_ oppress
us. WORK, for example, is a far more actual source of misery
for most of us than legislative politics. Alienation is far
more dangerous for us than toothless outdated dying
ideologies. Mental addiction to "ideals"--which in fact turn
out to be mere projections of our resentment and sensations
of victimization--will never further our project. The TAZ is
not a harbinger of some pie-in-the-sky Social Utopia to
which we must sacrifice our lives that our children's
children may breathe a bit of free air. The TAZ must be the
scene of our present autonomy, but it can only exist on the
condition that we already know ourselves as free beings.

2. The _counter-Net_ must expand. At present it reflects
more abstraction than actuality. Zines and BBSs exchange
information, which is part of the necessary groundwork of
the TAZ, but very little of this information relates to
concrete goods and services necessary for the autonomous
life. We do not live in CyberSpace; to dream that we do is
to fall into CyberGnosis, the false transcendence of the
body. The TAZ is a physical place and we are either in it or
not. All the senses must be involved. The Web is like a new
sense in some ways, but it must be _added_ to the others--
the others must not be subtracted from it, as in some
horrible parody of the mystic trance. Without the Web, the
full realization of the TAZ-complex would be impossible. But
the Web is not the end in itself. It's a weapon.

3. The apparatus of Control--the "State"--must (or so we
must assume) continue to deliquesce and petrify
simultaneously, must progress on its present course in which
hysterical rigidity comes more and more to mask a vacuity,
an abyss of power. As power "disappears," our will to power
must be disappearance.

We've already dealt with the question of whether the TAZ can
be viewed "merely" as a work of art. But you will also
demand to know whether it is more than a poor rat-hole in
the Babylon of Information, or rather a maze of tunnels,
more and more connected, but devoted only to the economic
dead-end of piratical parasitism? I'll answer that I'd
rather be a rat in the wall than a rat in the cage--but I'll
also insist that the TAZ transcends these categories.

A world in which the TAZ succeeded in _putting_down_roots_
might resemble the world envisioned by "P.M." in his fantasy
novel _bolo'bolo_. Perhaps the TAZ is a "proto-bolo." But
inasmuch as the TAZ exists _now_, it stands for much more
than the mundanity of negativity or countercultural drop-out-
ism. We've mentioned the _festal_ aspect of the moment which
is unControlled, and which adheres in spontaneous self-
ordering, however brief. It is "epiphanic"--a peak
experience on the social as well as individual scale.

Liberation is realized _in_ struggle--this is the essence of
Nietzsche's "self-overcoming." The present thesis might also
take for a sign Nietzsche's _wandering_. It is the precursor
of the _drift_, in the Situ sense of the _derive_ and
Lyotard's definition of _driftwork_. We can foresee a whole
new geography, a kind of pilgrimage-map in which holy sites
are replaced by peak experiences and TAZs: a _real_ science
of psychotopography, perhaps to be called "geo-autonomy" or
"anarchomancy."

The TAZ involves a kind of _ferality_, a growth from
tameness to wild(er)ness, a "return" which is also a step
forward. It also demands a "yoga" of chaos, a project of
"higher" orderings (of consciousness or simply of life)
which are approached by "surfing the wave-front of chaos,"
of complex dynamism. The TAZ is an art of life in continual
rising up, wild but gentle--a seducer not a rapist, a
smuggler rather than a bloody pirate, a dancer not an
eschatologist.

Let us admit that we have attended parties where for one
brief night a republic of gratified desires was attained.
Shall we not confess that the politics of that night have
more reality and force for us than those of, say, the entire
U.S. Government? Some of the "parties" we've mentioned
lasted for two or three _years_. Is this something worth
imagining, worth fighting for? Let us study invisibility,
webworking, psychic nomadism--and who knows what we might
attain?

--Spring Equinox, 1990

Appendix A. Chaos Linguistics

NOT YET A SCIENCE but a proposition: That certain problems
in linguistics might be solved by viewing language as a
complex dynamical system or "Chaos field."

Of all the responses to Saussure's linguistics, two have
special interest here: the first, "antilinguistics," can be
traced--in the modern period--from Rimbaud's departure for
Abyssinia; to Nietzsche's "I fear that while we still have
grammar we have not yet killed God"; to dada; to Korzybski's
"the Map is not the Territory"; to Burroughs' cut-ups and
"breakthrough in the Gray Room"; to Zerzan's attack on
language itself as representation and mediation.

The second, Chomskyan Linguistics, with its belief in
"universal grammar" and its tree diagrams, represents (I
believe) an attempt to "save" language by discovering
"hidden invariables," much in the same way certain
scientists are trying to "save" physics from the
"irrationality" of quantum mechanics. Although as an
anarchist Chomsky might have been expected to side with the
nihilists, in fact his beautiful theory has more in common
with platonism or sufism than with anarchism. Traditional
metaphysics describes language as pure light shining through
the colored glass of the archetypes; Chomsky speaks of
"innate" grammars. Words are leaves, branches are sentences,
mother tongues are limbs, language families are trunks, and
the roots are in "heaven"...or the DNA. I call this
"hermetalinguistics"--hermetic and metaphysical. Nihilism
(or "HeavyMetalinguistics" in honor of Burroughs) seems to
me to have brought language to a dead end and threatened to
render it "impossible" (a great feat, but a depressing one)-
-while Chomsky holds out the promise and hope of a last-
minute revelation, which I find equally difficult to accept.
I too would like to "save" language, but without recourse to
any "Spooks," or supposed rules about God, dice, and the
Universe.

Returning to Saussure, and his posthumously published notes
on anagrams in Latin poetry, we find certain hints of a
process which somehow escapes the sign/signifier dynamic.
Saussure was confronted with the suggestion of some sort of
"meta"-linguistics which happens _within_ language rather
than being imposed as a categorical imperative from
"outside." As soon as language begins to play, as in the
acrostic poems he examined, it seems to resonate with self-
amplifying complexity. Saussure tried to quantify the
anagrams but his figures kept running away from him (as if
perhaps nonlinear equations were involved). Also, he began
to find the anagrams _everywhere_, even in Latin prose. He
began to wonder if he were hallucinating--or if anagrams
were a natural unconscious process of _parole_. He abandoned
the project.

I wonder: if enough of this sort of data were crunched
through a computer, would we begin to be able to model
language in terms of complex dynamical systems? Grammars
then would not be "innate," but would emerge from chaos as
spontaneously evolving "higher orders," in Prigogine's sense
of "creative evolution." Grammars could be thought of as
"Strange Attractors," like the hidden pattern which "caused"
the anagrams--patterns which are "real" but have "existence"
only in terms of the sub-patterns they manifest. If
_meaning_ is elusive, perhaps it is because consciousness
itself, and therefore language, is _fractal_.

I find this theory more satisfyingly anarchistic than either
anti-linguistics or Chomskyanism. It suggests that language
can overcome representation and mediation, not because it is
innate, but _because_it_is_chaos_. It would suggest that all
dadaistic experimentation (Feyerabend described his school
of scientific epistemology as "anarchist dada") in sound
poetry, gesture, cut-up, beast languages, etc.--all this was
aimed neither at discovering nor destroying meaning, but at
_creating_ it. Nihilism points out gloomily that language
"arbitrarily" creates meaning. Chaos Linguistics happily
agrees, but adds that language can overcome language, that
language can create freedom out of semantic tyranny's
confusion and decay.

Appendix B. Applied Hedonics

THE BONNOT GANG WERE vegetarians and drank only water. They
came to a bad (tho' picturesque) end. Vegetables and water,
in themselves excellent things--pure zen really--shouldn't
be consumed as martyrdom but as an epiphany. Self-denial as
radical praxis, the Leveller impulse, tastes of millenarian
gloom--and this current on the Left shares an historical
wellspring with the neo-puritan fundamentalism and moralic
reaction of our decade. The New Ascesis, whether practiced
by anorexic health-cranks, thin-lipped police sociologists,
downtown straight-edge nihilists, cornpone fascist baptists,
socialist torpedoes, drug-free Republicans...in every case
the motive force is the same: _resentment_.

In the face of contemporary pecksniffian anaesthesia we'll
erect a whole gallery of forebears, heros who carried on the
struggle against bad consciousness but still knew how to
party, a genial gene pool, a rare and difficult category to
define, great minds not just for Truth but for the
_truth_of_pleasure_, serious but not sober, whose sunny
disposition makes them not sluggish but sharp, brilliant but
not tormented. Imagine a Nietzsche with good digestion. Not
the tepid Epicureans nor the bloated Sybarites. Sort of a
spiritual hedonism, an actual Path of Pleasure, vision of a
good life which is both noble and _possible_, rooted in a
sense of the magnificent over-abundance of reality.

Shaykh Abu Sa'id of Khorassan
Charles Fourier
Brillat-Savarin
Rabelais
Abu Nuwas
Aga Khan III
R. Vaneigem
Oscar Wilde
Omar Khayyam
Sir Richard Burton
Emma Goldman
add your own favorites

Appendix C. Extra Quotes

As for us, He has appointed the job of permanent
unemployment.
If he wanted us to work, after all,
He would not have created this _wine_.
With a skinfull of _this_, Sir,
would you rush out to commit economics?

--Jalaloddin Rumi, _Diwan-e_Shams_

Here with a Loaf of Bread beneath the Bough,
A flask of Wine, A Book of Verse--and Thou
Beside me singing in the Wilderness--
And Wilderness is Paradise enow.
Ah, my Beloved, fill the cup that clears
To-day of past Regrets and future Fears--
_Tomorrow_?--Why, Tomorrow I may be
Myself with Yesterday's Sev'n Thousand Years.
Ah, Love! could thou and I with Fate conspire
To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire,
Would not we shatter it to bits--and then
Re-mould it nearer to the Heart's Desire!

--Omar FitzGerald

History, materialism, monism, positivism, and all the "isms"
of this world are old and rusty tools which I don't need or
mind anymore. My principle is life, my end is death. I wish
to live my life intensely for to embrace my life tragically.

You are waiting for the revolution? My own began a long time
ago! When you will be ready (God, what an endless wait!) I
won't mind going along with you for awhile. But when you'll
stop, I shall continue on my insane and triumphal way toward
the great and sublime conquest of the nothing!
Any society that you build will have its limits. And outside
the limits of any society the unruly and heroic tramps will
wander, with their wild & virgin thoughts--they who cannot
live without planning ever new and dreadful outbursts of
rebellion!

I shall be among them!

And after me, as before me, there will be those saying to
their fellows: "So turn to yourselves rather than to your
Gods or to your idols. Find what hides in yourselves; bring
it to light; show yourselves!"

Because every person; who, searching his own inwardness,
extracts what was mysteriously hidden therein; is a shadow
eclipsing any form of society which can exist under the sun!
All societies tremble when the scornful aristocracy of the
tramps, the inaccessibles, the uniques, the rulers over the
ideal, and the conquerors of the nothing resolutely
advances.
So, come on iconoclasts, forward!

"Already the foreboding sky grows dark and silent!"

--Renzo Novatore
Arcola, January, 1920

PIRATE RANT

Captain Bellamy

Daniel Defoe, writing under the pen name Captain Charles
Johnson, wrote what became the first standard historical
text on pirates, _A_General_History_of_the_Robberies_and_
Murders_of_the_Most_Notorious_Pirates_. According to Patrick
Pringle's _Jolly_Roger_, pirate recruitment was most
effective among the unemployed, escaped bondsmen, and
transported criminals. The high seas made for an
instantaneous levelling of class inequalities. Defoe relates
that a pirate named Captain Bellamy made this speech to the
captain of a merchant vessel he had taken as a prize. The
captain of the merchant vessel had just declined an
invitation to join the pirates.

I am sorry they won't let you have your sloop again, for I
scorn to do any one a mischief, when it is not to my
advantage; damn the sloop, we must sink her, and she might
be of use to you. Though you are a sneaking puppy, and so
are all those who will submit to be governed by laws which
rich men have made for their own security; for the cowardly
whelps have not the courage otherwise to defend what they
get by knavery; but damn ye altogether: damn them for a pack
of crafty rascals, and you, who serve them, for a parcel of
hen-hearted numbskulls. They vilify us, the scoundrels do,
when there is only this difference, they rob the poor under
the cover of law, forsooth, and we plunder the rich under
the protection of our own courage. Had you not better make
then one of us, than sneak after these villains for
employment?

When the captain replied that his conscience would not let
him break the laws of God and man, the pirate Bellamy
continued:

You are a devilish conscience rascal, I am a free prince,
and I have as much authority to make war on the whole world,
as he who has a hundred sail of ships at sea, and an army of
100,000 men in the field; and this my conscience tells me:
but there is no arguing with such snivelling puppies, who
allow superiors to kick them about deck at pleasure.

THE DINNER PARTY

The highest type of human society in the existing social
order is found in the parlor. In the elegant and refined
reunions of the aristocratic classes there is none of the
impertinent interference of legislation. The Individuality
of each is fully admitted. Intercourse, therefore, is
perfectly free. Conversation is continuous, brilliant, and
varied. Groups are formed according to attraction. They are
continuously broken up, and re-formed through the operation
of the same subtile and all-pervading influence. Mutual
deference pervades all classes, and the most perfect
harmony, ever yet attained, in complex human relations,
prevails under precisely those circumstances which
Legislators and Statesmen dread as the conditions of
inevitable anarchy and confusion. If there are laws of
etiquette at all, they are mere suggestions of principles
admitted into and judged of for himself or herself, by each
individual mind.

Is it conceivable that in all the future progress of
humanity, with all the innumerable elements of development
which the present age is unfolding, society generally, and
in all its relations, will not attain as high a grade of
perfection as certain portions of society, in certain
special relations, have already attained?

Suppose the intercourse of the parlor to be regulated by
specific legislation. Let the time which each gentleman
shall be allowed to speak to each lady be fixed by law; the
position in which they should sit or stand be precisely
regulated; the subjects which they shall be allowed to speak
of, and the tone of voice and accompanying gestures with
which each may be treated, carefully defined, all under
pretext of preventing disorder and encroachment upon each
other's privileges and rights, then can any thing be
conceived better calculated or more certain to convert
social intercourse into intolerable slavery and hopeless
confusion? THE POST-ACTION CRITIQUE

     All of the lessons and discussion presented in this brief document are
the distillate of after action group interviews with upwards of a hundred
rifle companies and many patrols and platoons that have engaged
independently in Vietnam.

     Every action was reconstructed in the fullest possible detail,
including the logistical and intelligence data, employment of weapons,
timing and placement of battle losses in the unit, location of wounds, etc. 
What is said herein of the enemy derives in whole from what officers and
men who have fought him in battle learned and reported out of their
experience.  Nothing has been taken from any intelligence document
circulated to the United States Army.  The document therefore is in itself
evidence of the great store of information about the Viet Cong that can be
tapped by talking with men of our combat line, all of which knowledge lies
waste unless someone makes the effort.

     The briefing actions at the company level generally took less than one
hour.  The longest lasted two days and more.  The average ran about three
and one-half hours.  To reconstruct a fight over that span of time required
from seven to eight hours of steady interrogation.

      Soon after engagement, any combat unit commander can do this same
thing: group interview his men until he knows all that happened to them
during the fire fight.  In their interest, in his own interest, and for the
good of the Army he cannot afford to do less.  There is no particular art
to the work; so long as exact chronology is maintained in developing the
story of the action, and so long as his men feel confident that he seeks
nothing from them but the truth, the whole truth, then the needed results
will come.  Every division and every independent brigade in Vietnam has at
least one combat historian.  He is charged with conducting this kind of
research; he can also assist and advise any unit commander who would like
to know how to do it on his own.

     Special rewards come to the unit commander who will make the try. 
Nothing else will give him a closer bond with his men.  Not until he does
it will he truly know what they did under fire.  Just as the combat
critique is a powerful stimulant of unit morale, having all the warming
effect of a good cocktail on an empty stomach, and even as it strengthens
each soldier's appreciation of his fellows, it enables troops to understand
for the first time the multitudinous problems and pressures on the
commander.  They will go all the better for him the next time out and he
will have a much clearer view of his human resources.  Combat does have a
way of separating the men from the boys; but on the other hand the boys
want to be classed with the men, and influence of a number of shining
examples in their midst does accelerate the maturing process.  The
seasoning of a combat outfit comes fundamentally from men working together
under stress growing in knowledge of one another.

     Mistakes will be brought out during the critique.  Their revelation
cannot hurt the unit or the man.  Getting it out in the clear is one way -
probably the only way - to relieve feelings and clear the atmosphere,
provided the dignity of all present is maintained during the critique. 
Should the need for a personal admonishment or advice become indicated,
that can be reserved until later.

     Far more important, deeds of heroism and high merit, unknown to the
leader until that hour, become known to all hands.  From this knowledge
will come an improved awards system based on a standard of justice that
will be commonly acknowledged.  Men not previously recognized as possessing
the qualities for squad and platoon leading will be viewed in a new light
and moved toward promotion that all will know is deserved.

     No richer opportunity than this may be put before the commander of a
combat company or battery or the sergeant who leads a patrol into a fight. 
He who hesitates to take advantage of it handicaps himself more than all
others.  If he does not know where he has been, he can never be certain
where he is going.

     That is to say, in the end, that something is lacking in his military
character, a "zeal to close the circuit," which is the mark of the good
combat leader.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                          THE CORE OF THE PROBLEM

     Though it may sound like a contradiction to speak first of the tactics
of engaging fortifications in a war where the enemy of the United States is
a hit-and-run guerrilla, seeking more at 
the present time to avoid open battle than to give it except when he
imagines that the terms are more than moderately favorable to his side, a
moment's reflection will sustain the logic of the approach.

     His fortified areas almost invariably present the greatest difficulty
to U.S. tactical forces, and it is when we voluntarily engage them that our
loss rates are most immoderate.  At no other technique is he more skilled
than in the deceptive camouflaging of his fortified base camps and semi-
fortified villages.  There, even nature is made to work in his favor;
trees, shrubs, and earth itself are reshaped to conceal bunker locations
and trench lines.  Many of these locations are fund temporarily abandoned,
thus presenting only the problem of how to wreck them beyond possibility of
further use.  On the other hand, when he chooses to fight out of any one of
them, the choice is seldom, if ever, made because he is trapped beyond
chance of withdrawal, but because he expects to inflict more than enough
hurt on Americans in the attack to warrant making a stand.

     There is even more to it than that.  The fortified base camps and
villages are the pivots of the Communist aggression.  Denied their use, the
movement would wither.  The primary problem of defeating the North
Vietnamese Army (NVA) south of the 17th Parallel and the ultimate problem
of destroying the Viet Cong (VC) between that line and the southern
extremity of the Delta are joined in the tactical task of eliminating their
fortified areas with maximum economy of force.
     
     Years of labor and mountains of irreplaceable material have gone into
building this network of strong camps over the country.  It is the
framework that sustains irregular operations, and a semi-guerrilla army can
no more get along without it than a conventional army can hold the field
when cut off from its main bases.  Yet there is no such camp or armed
village in Vietnam today that is beyond the reach of U.S. forces.  However
remote and concealed, none can be moved or indefinitely kept hidden.  To
find and smash each, one by one, is an essential task, a prime object in
conclusively successful campaigning.  The Viet Cong movement cannot survive
as a horde of fugitives, unidentified as they mingle with the village crowd
and bury their arms in the surrounding paddies.  When the fortified bases
go, the infrastructure withers, and thus weakened, finally dies.

     The fortified base camp is roughly circular in form with an outer rim
of bunkers and foxholes enclosing a total system of living quarters,
usually frame structures above ground, command bunkers, kitchens, and
sleeping platforms.  But as with the U.S. defensive perimeter, the shape
will vary according to the terrain, the rise and fall of ground, and the
use of natural features to restrict attack on the camp to one or two
avenues.  Some of the bases, and in particular those used only for training
or way stations, have minimum defensive works.  In all cases, however, the
enemy is prepared to defend from a ground attack.

     The semi-fortified village is usually an attenuated or stretched out
set of hamlets, having length rather than breadth, a restricted approach,
bunkers (usually at the corners of the huts), lateral trenches, and
sometimes a perpendicular trench fitted with fighting bunkers running the
length of the defended area along one flank.  There will be at least one
exit or escape route rearward, though the position is often otherwise
something of a cul de sac, made so by natural features.  Tunnels connect
the bunkers and earthworks, enabling the defenders to pop up, disappear,
then fire again from another angle, a jack-in-the-box kind of maneuvering
that doubles the effect of their numbers.  An unfordable river may run
along one flank while wide open paddy land bounds the other.  The apparent
lack of escape routes makes the position look like an ideal target for our
side, with our large advantage in air power and artillery.  But until
bombardment has blown down most of the foliage any maneuver into the
complex by infantry skirmishers is a deepening puzzle.

     When the attempt is made to seal in the enemy troops, one small
opening left in the chain of force, such as a ditch, the palm grown slope
of a canal bank, or a drainage pipe too small for an American to venture,
will be more than enough to suit their purpose.  They will somehow find it;
there is nothing that they do better by day or night.  It is as if they
have a sixth sense for finding the way out and for taking it soundlessly. 
They are never encircled so long as one hole remains.  Beaten, they will
lose themselves in shrubbery and tree tops while the daylight lasts, get
together when night closes, and make for the one exit.

     Three ground units of the 1st Air Cavalry Division fought through an
action of this kind in early December, 1966, and took heavy losses.  By
dark the fight was won and resistance ended.  The natural boundaries of the
combat area permitted no chance for escape over 95 percent of the distance. 
Through a misunderstanding, the two rifle units covering the one land
bridge left a 30 meter gap of flat land between their flanks.  Though it
was a moonlit night, the enemy remnants, estimated at two platoons or more,
got away without a fight.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                     LESSON ONE - THE DISTRICT ASSAULT

     The record of U.S. Army operations in South Vietnam demonstrates one
hard fact: a company sized attack upon an enemy fortified base camp or
semi-fortified village, held in equal strength by NVA or VC main force with
a determination to defend, and not subjected to intense artillery and/or
air strikes beforehand, means payment of a high price by the attacker.  The
result of such an attempt is either ultimate withdrawal by the attacking
force, too often after excessive loss, or a belated reinforcement and a
more prolonged involvement than was anticipated or is judicious.

     Yet the tactic seems to have a fatal allure for the average young U.S.
rifle company commander.  It has been many times tried and, just as often,
failed.  The enemy deliberately tries to make the position look weak, and
hence attractive.  One ruse is to leave frontal bunkers unmanned, though
the approach of the attacker is known.  Initial resistance will be offered
by a squad minus, while within the complex a company plus is preparing to
maneuver.  The effort is subtly directed toward getting the attack snarled
in a maze of fortifications not visible to the eye, whence extrication
grows ever more difficult and advance becomes extremely costly.

     The direct consequence for the rifle company that impulsively engages
a position well beyond its strength, at least 50 percent of the time, will
be as follows:

          (1)  Its battle order, or fighting formations, are weakened
               through immediate losses in its frontal element.

          (2)  It must concentrate on the problem of extracting its
               casualties under fire.

          (3)  Its direct pressure against the enemy is diminished and
               disorganized.  In short, overimpulsiveness runs counter to
               effective aggressiveness.

     Upon contacting any such fortified position, where direct enemy fire
by automatic weapons supplies proof of the intention to defend, the rifle
platoon or company should thereafter immediately dispose to keep its
strength and numbers (weapon power and men) latent and under cover to the
full limit permitted by the environment.  It may even simulate a
withdrawal, continue desultory fire from its forward weapons, or seek the
enemy rear when favored by terrain, weather, and light.  The full length
assault is to be avoided while the heavy fires of supporting arms are
brought in.  The careful, fire covered probe is the called-for expedient. 
The headlong rush, like the attempt at envelopment before any attempt has
been made to feel out resistance, should be avoided absolutely.

     Where environment and weather permit such intervention, artillery
fires should concentrate on the rear, while tactical air targets on the
enemy camp.  Otherwise the effect of bombardment is likely to be the
premature aborting of the position.  Following bombardment, the direct
frontal assault by the single rifle company should not be pressed unless
reinforcement is already on its way, within 20 to 30 minutes of closing, in
strength sufficient to engage at least one flank of the enemy position.

     The attack should then proceed by the echeloning of fire teams, taking
advantage of natural cover and concealed avenues of approach.  Gradual
advance is the one safeguard against full exposure and undue loss, as in
the taking of a city.  Holding at least one platoon in reserve is so much
insurance against enemy attack on the flank or read.

     When casualties occur in the initial stage of encounter with the enemy
in fixed positions, the extraction of WIA's by forward skirmishers should
not be more than the distance required to give them the nearest protection
from enemy fire.  This stricture should include a relatively secure
approach for the aid man.  Extraction of the dead is to be delayed until
the development of the action makes it unnecessary to be done under fire. 
Unless these rules are followed during engagement, unit action stalls
around the attempt to extricate casualties, thereby yielding fire-and-
movement initiative to the enemy.  This effect was observed in
approximately one-third of the company actions researched.

     The data basis clearly indicates that the one most effective way to
deal with the enemy fighting out of the fortified camp or village is to zap
him with the heaviest artillery and tactical air ordnance, not to maneuver
against him with infantry only.  The "finding" infantry must also carry on
as the "fixing" force, leaving the "finishing" to the heavy weapons that
can both kill men and batter down protective works.  If overextension is to
be avoided, the sealing-in of the position may hardly be assigned to the
unit that has initiated the action.  The sealing-in is higher command's
problem.  Additional maneuver elements are dropped to the rear of the
position, and if need be the flanks, to block likely escape routes, strike
the withdrawing columns, and continue the mop up once the enemy, realizing
that our infantry in the assault will not fall victim to his subtle trap,
wearies of the punishment.  How far these reaction deployments are spread
should depend on the topography, availability of natural cover, and all
else connected with the enemy's ability to vanish into the landscape and
our chance of cornering him before he does so.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                     LESSON TWO - WARNING AND MOVEMENT

     For the rifle platoon or company to attempt envelopment of any village
where there is some reason to suspect that it is fortified and will be
defended is tactically as foolhardy as to assault directly any enemy
position in a non-built-up area not subject to ground level or overhead
surveillance.  Reports from air observers that when seen from directly
above at not more than 100 feet the village looks unguarded and unfortified
are not to be considered conclusive, since it has been repeatedly shown
that the enemy's skill with natural camouflage may wholly conceal at such
distance a truly formidable position.

     A "position" is defined for this purpose as that ground from which, on
initial contact, volley or approximately synchronized fire from a number of
automatic weapons is directed against the friendly unit in movement. 
Particularly, when the enemy opens with a mix of rifle and machinegun fire,
there is positive indication that he has not been surprised and rates
himself strong enough to invite the attack.  Even when he opens with random
and unaimed rifle fire from somewhere in the background, this is no sure
sign that he is getting away and that therefore prompt pursuit is in order. 
Here is a much-used VC-NVA ruse to draw the attack pell mell into a well-
concealed, defended position.

     An attempt to envelop a village with light forces, when its possession
of defended works or lack thereof is unknown, can only lead to dispersion
of force and a regrouping at unnecessary cost when the village is defended. 
A careful probe on a narrow front with a fire base in readiness is the
proper method.  If fired upon, the unit then has two options: (a) house-by-
house and bunker-by-bunkers movement into the complex as in attack on any
built-up area; or (b) the calling in of heavy support weapons, according to
the volume and intensity of the enemy fire.  Any attempt to close escape
routes by surrounding a succession of hamlets prior to developing the
situation by limited probing is either prohibitively hazardous or time
wasting.  Any direct fire out of a village serves warning.  And, as
previously said, so does erratic and distant fire from beyond the hamlet
when it is time to the American forward movement and is roughly counter to
the direction of the attack.  This familiar enemy come-on is an incitement
to rush into a well-laid ambush.

     A sudden volley fire out of the hamlet, wood patch, or any location
must prompt caution and reconsideration rather than prompt immediate
forward extension in the assault.  The enemy does not volley to cut and
run; almost never does he do so even when his sole object is to delay and
disrupt pursuit, after breaking off engagement.  Furthermore, the enemy
does not employ ground as we do, with emphasis on fields of fire and a
superior height.  He may do so some of the time; his surprises are staged
most often by his choosing a position that we would rate impractical or
untenable.  He will fortify a ridge saddle to fire therefrom in four
directions, ignoring the higher ground.  Thus he can block advance via the
draws or engage the attackers at close quarters when they move via the
trail which often follows the spine of the ridge.  Or he may rig a deadfall
in front of a seeming dead end where slopes to front and rear seem to cut
off all possibilities of escape.  In village defense, he will leave empty
his best situated forward bunkers covering the one track that leads into
the first hamlet to create the illusion of abandonment.  As a result the
assault is enticed into an interior jungle of foliage covered works and
underground passages that in combination will facilitate the enemy's rapid
movement from point to point.  To thwart his design, the following measures
are indicated:

     (1)  In the approach march, except when it is over terrain where
          observation to front and flanks removes any possibility of his
          immediate presence in strength, all ground should be approached
          as if he were present in force.  Seldom in Vietnam are there
          marches over such an obviously secure area.

     (2)  Defended built up areas, whether of purely military character or
          a native hamlet, when clearly supplied with surface works and
          amplified by underground passages, are not to be reckoned as
          proper targets for the rifle company or smaller unit operating
          unassisted.  One or two "snipers," or riflemen operating from
          cover, spending a few rounds in token resistance and then
          fleeing, do not constitute "defense of a village" or of a wood
          line.  Four or five enemy continuing to fire together at close
          range from any such location after being taken under fire should
          be accepted as warning that larger forces are immediately
          present.  If the enemy force is no larger than a platoon minus,
          its advantage in position still warrants the prompt calling in of
          maximum supporting fires.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                     LESSON THREE - DOUBLING SECURITY

     The record of more than 100 U.S. rifle companies and as many platoons
that have been heavily engaged since May 1, 1966 shows unmistakably that
the most frequent cause of surprise, disorganization of the unit under
fire, and heavy initial losses has been excessive haste in the advance
overland and outright carelessness about security.

     A great part of our shock killing losses occur in the first stage of
engagement.  The enemy, fortunately, is not skilled at following up a first
advantage in surprise fire.  His musketry, when large numbers of his people
engage at close range, is highly inaccurate compared to our own.  Our
losses in the rifle line once the fight is joined are rarely extravagant. 
The great wasting of lives comes of too much rushing in the movement to
contact or of tactical carelessness in the first stages of engagement.  A
column that indulges in all-out chase of the enemy can be caught by him if
it has not taken pains to make sure that it is not being followed.  Or the
column on departing its night location may expose its intent to continue in
widely separated fractions disregarding whether its every move is under
enemy observation.  Or it may march blindly onto ground such as a jungle
clearing when common sense dictates extreme caution.

     In every incident that has involved the destruction of a platoon-size
unit, the misfortune was due less to enemy guile than to our own lack of
judgment.  The enemy is fairly well skilled at laying ambushes and using
lures and ruses to draw forces in the right direction.  But he is not
superhumanly clever.  Applied common sense will beat his every design.  It
is not common sense to run chances by making haste when one is rushing
straight to an entrapment.  Consider two recent examples of sudden shock
loss due to impetuous advance:

     (1)  The platoon on patrol moved out over the same route - a straight
          running trail - taken by a patrol the previous day.  There was no
          periodic halt to scout enemy presence in any or all four
          directions.  No stay-behind party was peeled off to see whether
          the patrol was being followed.  The platoon in single file
          continued on the same azimuth for two hours.  That line,
          projected, let to two large clearings in the jungle separated by
          less than 200 meters.  The column advanced across the center of
          the first clearing, 125 meters wide, and on the far side of the
          wood line walked directly into a well-prepared ambush.

     (2)  The company had passed the night in defensive perimeter adjacent
          to much higher ground where observation was unrestricted by
          vegetation.  The Cambodian border lay directly to the west. 
          Although the men on LP (listening post) duty could hear enemy
          moving through the grass nearby during the night, when the
          company moved out shortly after first light it did not
          reconnoiter the high ground to the south along its line of march. 
          The lead platoon advanced directly past it, and was soon 1,000
          meters forward of the main body, which was also in motion.  The
          rear platoon was kept tied to the ground of the night position,
          600 meters behind the main body.  While one group of enemy
          engaged and immobilized the main body, after luring it into an
          ambush, another closed on the rear platoon from two sides and in
          two minutes of action annihilated it with automatic weapons.

     The "lessons learned" from these two experiences are so glaringly
apparent that it is not necessary to spell them out.  There remains but to
examine the main reasons why the practice of "pushing on" persists at the
expense of conservation of force.  They are, in order of importance and
cost:

     (1)  The greenness of commanders of the smaller tactical units and the
          emotional confusion deriving from the momentum with which they
          are projected afield via the helicopter lift followed by the dash
          to form a defensive circle around the LZ (landing zone).  This
          sprint-start blocks understanding that the pace thereafter as the
          unit deploys must be altered radically.  The jolt comes of the
          abrupt shift from high gear to low.  It is not enough to "slow
          down to a fast trot."  Prudence requires nothing more or less
          than a tight reining-in for a fully observant and fully secured
          advance.

     (2)  Pressure from higher commands to "get on with it." There is
          rarely any such urgency except when some other unit has become
          heavily engaged and is gravely endangered.  Even then, making
          sure of the degree of urgency to avoid making a bad situation
          worse is the primary obligation of higher command.  Too often the
          unit sent post-haste on a rescue act has emerged having taken far
          greater punishment en route than the unit to be rescued.  Last,
          it should be noted that such pressures from above are exerted
          much less frequently in Vietnam than in Korea or in World War II.

     (3)  The assignment of a predetermined "objective" that while hardly
          warranting the name implies that Unit Alpha must either link with
          Unit Bravo at Point Niner by 1100 or prove itself remiss.  Often
          no situational urgency exists, and the obstacles on the march may
          be greatly unlike for the two units and not have been tactically
          plotted or analyzed.  There is nothing wrong with the designation
          of the rendezvous point.  The error is made in the assignment of
          a definite hour.  Each unit must be allowed to cope properly with
          its own march problems.  The first arriving simply take up a
          defensive posture until the second closes.

     (4)  Selecting in advance the location of the night perimeter when too
          little thought has been given to the stress and unavoidable delay
          which may be imposed upon the unit by natural obstacles or minor
          and harassing enemy elements.  Forced marches in these conditions
          are usually attributable to the designation of what the map or
          prior reconnaissance has indicated would be a viable LZ.  Even if
          it so turns out, it may not be worth the striving, if the
          marching force arrives in a state of exhaustion.  A unit closing
          on its night position, and having to go at its defensive
          preparation piecemeal just as darkness descends, is in an acutely
          vulnerable position.  There are some marked examples from Paul
          Revere IV, fought in December, 1966, that deserve careful regard. 
          The troops were put under a heavy and possibly unnecessary
          handicap by an extended march and late arrival at the ground to
          be defended.  Their lack of time in which to organize properly
          gave the enemy an opening advantage.  Nonetheless, there was no
          panic.  The NVA surprise achieved only limited success.  The
          salient feature of these actions was the counter-surprising
          ability of the average U.S. rifleman to react quickly, move
          voluntarily and without awaiting an order to the threatened
          quarter, and get weapons going while the position was becoming
          rounded-out piecemeal under the pressure of direct fire.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                   LESSON FOUR - CONTENDING WITH JUNGLE

     The word "jungle" is too loosely used by U.S. Army combat troops in
Vietnam to permit of broad generalizations about what tactical formation
best serves security during movement and conservation of force should
significant contact ensue.  The term is misapplied every day.  Men fresh
from a fight say something like this, "We engaged them in impossibly dense
jungle." Then a detailed description, or a firsthand visit to the premises,
reveals it was nothing of the kind; it was merely the thickest bush or
heaviest tropical forest that they had yet seen.

     So for the purpose at hand some definition is thought necessary, rough
though it may be.  If troops deployed in line can proceed at a slow walk,
with one man being able to see three or four others without bunching, and
each having a view around him somewhere between 20 and 30 meters in depth,
this is not jungle, though it may be triple-canopied forest.  The
encumbrance to movement out of tangled vegetation and the extreme limiting
of personal horizon due to the obstruction of matted vines, clumped bamboo,
or banyan forest with dense undergrowth such as the "wait-a-minute" thorn
entanglement are evidence of the real thing irrespective of how much
sunlight permeates the forest top.  The impediment to movement and the
foreshortening of view are the essential military criteria.  When we speak
of jungle we therefore mean the condition of the forest in which forward
movement is limited to 300-500 meters per hour, and to make this limited
progress troops must in part hack their way through.

     When any troop body - our own or the enemy's - is thus confronted, it
cannot in any real sense maneuver; and the use of that verb is a self-
contradiction.  The troop body can only imperfectly respond to immediate
pressures which bring one man closer to another in the interests of mutual
survival and the organic will to resist.  The unit so proceeding and not
yet engaged is best advised to advance single file for lack of any more
reasonable alternative.  Its point - the cutting edge - should be not more
than 200 meters to the fore, to conserve energy and insure the most prompt
possible collection in emergency.  Serving as both the alarm element and
the trail-breaker, the point needs to be rotated at not more than one-hour
intervals, for work sharing.  To broaden the front and advance in platoon
columns doubles the risk and the work without accelerating the rate of
advance.  Should both fronts become engaged simultaneously, being equally
compromised, the existence of two fronts compounds the problem of over-all
control and unified response.  The column in file, hit at its front, may
more readily withdraw over the route already broken or reform forward and
align on the foremost active element, which rarely may extend over more
than a two-squad front.

     The data basis on such encounters makes clear that U.S. infantry in
Vietnam can withstand the shock of combat under these supremely testing
conditions.  A number of the sharpest company-size actions in the 1966
campaigning were fought and won in dense jungle, and several of these
encounters have become celebrated.  On the other hand, the same data basis
indicates that this is not a productive field for our arms, and for the
following reasons:

     (1)  The fight on average becomes joined at ranges between 12 and 20
          meters, which is too close to afford any real advantage to our
          man-carried weapons.

     (2)  Should the top canopy of the jungle be upwards of 40-50 feet high
          our smokes other than WP (white phosphorus) cannot put up a high
          enough plume for the effective marking of a position.

     (3)  Supporting fires, to avoid striking into friendly forces, must
          allow too wide an error margin to influence the outcome
          decisively.

     (4)  Mortars are of no use unless they can be based where overhead
          clearance is available.  A highly workable technique being
          employed by units in Vietnam is to fly the mortars into the
          defensive perimeter, LZ permitting, each night and lifting them
          out prior to movement.

     (5)  The advance of reinforcement is often erratic, always ponderous,
          and usually exhausting.

     (6)  Medevac, where not impossible, is almost invariably fraught with
          high unacceptable risk.

     In the true jungle the enemy has more working for him than in any
other place where we fight him.  But the added difficulties imposed by
nature cannot exclude the necessity for engaging him there from time to
time.  It is enough here to spell out the special hazards of operating in
an environment that, more than any other, penalizes unsupported engagement
by the U.S. rifle unit and calls for maximum utilization of heavy support
fires at the earliest possible moment.  All-important to the unit commander
is timely anticipation of the problem and the exercise of great caution
when operating in dense jungle.

     On the more positive side, according to the record, the jungle as to
its natural dangers is not the fearsome environment that the imagination
tends to make it.  In all of the fighting operations analyzed, not a single
U.S. soldier was reported as having been fatally bitten by a snake or
mauled by a wild animal.  In Operation Paul Revere IV, one man was killed
by a falling tree during a clearing operation, the only such casualty
recorded.  Leeches are an affliction to be suffered occasionally; troops
endure them and even jest about them, knowing that the discomfort will be
eased shortly.  The same is true of "jungle rot," a passing ailment of the
skin that usually affects the hands and forearm; it comes of abrasions
caused by pushing through thorny jungle growth.  A few days under the sun
will dry it up.  Most of the fighters who get it do not even bother to take
leave; they bandage the sores while they are afield, then take the time-
and-sun cure on their return to base camp.  Losses due to malaria can be
kept minimal by strict adherence to the prescribed discipline.  One major
additional safeguard, within control by the unit leader, is that he
refrains from marching and working his men to the point of full exhaustion,
a common sense command practice in all circumstances.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                        LESSON FIVE - RATES OF FIRE

     According to the data basis, the U.S. infantry line in Vietnam
requires no stimulation whatever to its employment of organic weapons when
engaged.  The fire rate among patrols in heavy, if brief, contact is not
infrequently 100 percent.  Within the rifle company, during engagement
prolonged for several hours, the rate will run 80 percent or more and the
only nonfirers will be the rearward administrative element or the more
critical cases among the early wounded.  It is not unusual for one man to
engage with three or more weapons during the course of a two-hour fight.

     Except during the first five minutes of unexpected engagement, which
almost impels an automatic rate, fire control is generally good.  The men
themselves, even in unseasoned units, quickly raise the cry: "Hold your
ammo! Fire semiautomatic!" No U.S. infantry unit, operating in
independence, has been forced to withdraw or extract, or made to suffer a
critical tactical embarrassment, as a result of ammunition shortage. 
Gunners on the M-60 go lighter than in other wars; the average carry is
1,000 rounds, with 1,200 being about the outside limit.  But in no single
instance have the machineguns ceased fire during a fight because the
position had run out of machinegun ammunition.

     When suddenly confronted by small numbers of the enemy, the Americans
firing their M-16's will in the overwhelming majority of cases miss a
target fully in view and not yet turning.  Whether the firing is done by a
moving point or by a rifleman sitting steady in an ambush, the results are
about the same - five total misses out of six tries - and the data basis
includes several hundred such incidents.  The inaccuracy prevails though
the usual such meeting is at 15 meters or less, and some of the firing is
at less than 10 feet.  An outright kill is most unusual.  Most of the waste
comes from unaimed fire done hurriedly.  The fault much of the time is that
out of excitement the shooter points high, rather than that the M-16 bullet
lacks knockdown power, a criticism of it often heard from combat-
experienced NCO's.  The VC winged but only wounded by an M-16 bullet, then
diving into the bush, makes a getaway three times out of four, leaving only
his pack and a blood trail.
     
     As to effectiveness over distance, until recently he data basis
deriving from 6 major and approximately 50 minor operations contained not
one episode of VC or NVA being killed by aimed fire from one or more M-16's
at ranges in excess of 60 meters.  Then, out of Operation Cedar Falls in
January, 1967, there developed 6 examples of such killings at ranges
upwards of 200 meters.  The difference can be explained by the nature of
the terrain.  Most of the kills during this operation were made in the open
rice paddy.

     The M-16 has proved itself an ideal weapon for jungle warfare.  Its
high rate of fire, lightweight, and easy-to-pack ammunition have made it
popular with its carrier.  But it cannot take the abuse or receive the
neglect its older brother, the M-1, could sustain.  It must be cleaned and
checked out whenever the opportunity affords.  Commanders need assign top
billing to the maintenance of the weapon to prevent inordinate battlefield
stoppages.  The new field cleaning kit assists the purpose.

     The fragmentation hand grenade, a workhorse in the infantryman's
arsenal of weapons in Korea, is of limited value in jungle fighting.  The
record shows that all infantry fights in the jungle are characterized by
close in-fighting at ranges from 12 to 20 meters and that the fragmentation
grenade cannot be accurately delivered because of the dense, thickly
intertwined and knotted jungle undergrowth that blocks its unrestricted
flight.  In numerous cases it was reported that the grenade striking a vine
and being deflected would then rebound on its thrower, causing friendly
casualties.

     The soldier enters battle with the average of four hand grenades
strapped to his already overloaded equipment.  He has been taught in
training that the grenade is the weapon for close in-fighting.  He learns
empirically about the difficulty attendant on using a grenade in the bush. 
Many times the record shows that he had to learn his lesson the hard way. 
The data basis shows that fewer than 10 percent - 6 percent being the usage
factor of World War II - of the grenades carried into battle are ever used. 
The configuration of the grenade itself makes it cumbersome and therefore
dangerous, as it is carried on the outside of the soldier's equipment and
is susceptible to any vine and snag that tugs at the safety pin.

     Out of this research then it may be reckoned that the soldier's load
could be lightened by two hand grenades and that all commanders should
closely analyze their unit's techniques for the employment of this weapon. 
Procedures must be developed and then practiced by troops on specially
prepared jungle hand grenade courses.  The trainer should bear in mind
during this instruction that post-operation analysis of World War II and
Korea showed that the soldier who had training in sports always excelled
with the grenade.  The information collected in Vietnam fully supports this
conclusion.  The old byword that was once synonymous with the art of
grenade throwing, "Fire in the Hole," should be brought back in use to warn
all that a grenade has been dispatched and cover must be sought.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                        LESSON SIX - COMMUNICATIONS

     Not one example has been unearthed of a critical tactical
disarrangement or defeat suffered by a U.S. infantry unit of any size or by
an artillery battery because of radio failure or a break in communications. 
Many RT's (radio operators) get shot up and their conspicuous equipment
invariably attracts the enemy fire.  Units are avoiding this hazard by
concealing the PRC-25 in standard rucksacks.  But no less invariably, the
shift to another frequency or the improvising of a relay saves the day.  In
the defense of LZ Bird on December 26, 1966, all radios went out for one
reason or another during the high tide of action.  Nonetheless, there
resulted no serious impairment to the action of the small infantry and
artillery fractions generating counterattack within the perimeter, though
heavy interdiction of enemy escape routes might have been brought in a few
minutes earlier had not radios failed.  That failure only slightly blurred
the aftermath to one of the more spectacular U.S. victories of the year.

     Despite the technological gain in our field communications since the
Korean War, and it has been truly noteworthy, a serious gap exists in the
flow of critical information during the time of combat.  The pinch is most
acute at platoon and company level.  Some of it is due to the far greater
mobility of operations in Vietnam, compared to anything we have experienced
in the past, and it may also be in part attributed to the peculiar nature
of the war.  There are no "little fights" in Vietnam; platoon-size and
company-size engagements compel the direct attention of top command.  It is
not unusual for the company commander, at the time of engaging the enemy,
to have his battalion, brigade, and division commanders all directly
overhead, trying to view the action.  Each has some reason for being there. 
But their presence does put an unprecedented strain on the leader at the
fighting level, and also on his radios, as everyone "comes up" on the
engaged unit's "freq" to give advice.  There are frequently too many
individuals trying to use the same frequency to permit of any one message
running to length.  So brevity is a rule worked overtime, too often to the
exclusion of fullness of necessary information.  A rule that must be
followed is that except for rare and unusual circumstances all commanders
should follow established radio procedures and not "come up" on the radio
of the next subordinate unit.

     One further glaring gap is to be noted.  When the unit, having had a
hard go in combat, is relieved or reinforced by another which must continue
the fight, very rarely does the commander going out tell the full story,
giving the detail of situation, to the incoming commander.  Just as rarely
does the latter insist on having it.  This is an understandable human
reaction, since both men are under the pressure of the problem immediately
facing their units in a moment of high tension, the one withdrawing and
worrying about extricating casualties, the other bent on deploying under
fire without loss of time.  But the danger of not having a full and free
exchange as the relief begins is that the second unit, left uninformed,
will at unnecessary cost attack on the same line and repeat the mistakes
made by the first unit.  The record shows unmistakably that lessons bought
by blood too frequently have to be repurchased.

     Another weakness common among junior leaders is the inaccurate
reporting of the estimate of the situation.  Estimates are many times
either so greatly exaggerated or so watered-down that they are not
meaningful to the next higher commander who must make critical decisions as
to troop employment and allocation of combat power.  The confusion and
noise of the battlefield are two reasons why faulty estimates are made;
overemotionalism and the sense of the drama are others.  These factors,
coupled with the judgment of an impulsive commander who feels that he must
say something on the radio--even if it is wrong--are the crux of the
problem.  Commanders must report the facts as they see them on the
battlefield.  If they don't know the situation, they must say just that!

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                   LESSON SEVEN - SECURITY ON THE TRAIL

     Strictures against the use of trails by U.S. forces during the
approach may be uttered ad nauseam, with emphasis upon the increased danger
of surprise and ambush.  The utterance does not, and will not, alter the
reality that more than half of the time the U.S. rifle platoon or company
is moving it will go by trail the full distance or during some stage of the
journey.  In such an area as the Iron Triangle, trails are unavoidable if
one is to move overland at all; the alternative is to move around by sampan
and stream.  The bush and forest-covered flats flanking Highway No. 13 have
a network of crisscrossing trails, with as many as five intersections in
one acre of ground.  It is humanly impossible to move across such a tract
without getting onto a trail.

     "What's wrong with it?  That's where we find the VC," is an argument
with a certain elementary logic in its favor.  That is, provided that
maximum security measures in moving by trail are punctiliously observed. 
What measures are most effective under varying conditions is a moot
subject, awaiting statement and standardization before hardening into a
doctrine.  As matters stand, the young infantry commander gropes his way
and makes his decisions empirically, according to the various pressures
bearing upon him.

     For the rifle company not in file column but formed more broadly for
movement toward the likelihood of contact, the commander again has no firm
doctrinal guide.  The formations adopted vary widely, and the reasoning
that supports some of the patterns is quite obscure.  Within one battalion
there will be as many designs as there are companies for traversing exactly
the same piece of terrain.  If it is reasonable to believe that there must
be one optimum formation that best safeguards the security of the body in
movement, then letting it be done six different ways is hardly reasonable.

     "Main trails" or "speed trails" in the Vietnam bush average not more
than 3 1/2 feet in width except at intersections.  When a unit goes by
trail through the heavy bush, it has no alternative to single file. 
Practical working distance between the point and the front of the main body
should vary according to the roughness of the terrain and how far one can
see ahead.  In Vietnam, as almost anywhere else, the flatter the ground the
straighter the trail; and if the ground is cut up, then trails are
tortuous.  The scouts should be at 20 and 10 meters beyond the van of the
point squad, observation permitting.  The point squad ought to be relieved
every hour to assure continued vigilance.  At each relief it buttonhooks
into the bush until the main body comes up, though this in not the practice
if the column is approaching an intersecting trail or stream bed or coming
to any built-up area.  Once in sight of a stream crossing or trail mouth,
the scout element (including the point squad) proceeds to check it out,
after reporting the sighting to the main body.  Its surest maneuver is a
hook forward through the bush over both flanks that should close beyond the
intersection in sufficient depth to abort any ambush.

     If the main body closes to within sight of the point while it is so
moving no real additional jeopardy will result, provided the column marks
time and maintains interval.  During such a halt, any attempt by the main
body to form a partial perimeter will merely cause bunching.  Depending on
conditions of terrain, visibility, and like factors, the rear of the point
may be anywhere from 200 to 50 meters ahead of the lead platoon's front
man.  At lesser distance than 50 meters its security value dwindles.  The
VC will let scouts pass an ambush to get at the point, or will pass up the
point to hit the main body, thereby doubling confusion to the column.  The
double hook forward by the point cuts the danger for all concerned.

     Nature itself limits the threat of lateral ambush against a column
going by jungle trail as opposed to one going through tall elephant grass
or over a path where banks or bushes on either side offer concealment for
the enemy.  The bush is too thick; to put fire on the trail, the field of
fire from Claymore or machinegun would be too short; too few targets would
be within reach of any one weapon.  A 5- to 10-meter break between squads--
which does not retard movement--enhances march security.

     Where making its circular deployment to check out any suspected ambush
site, the scout element should be supported by the machinegun, which is
best placed with No. 2 man of the point.  An alternative to this move is to
have the gunner reconnoiter the bush forward with fire; if the bush is
extra thick, the M-79 may do better.  The RT is with the point's last man,
who serves as breakaway, running the word back should there be instrument
failure.

     When a stay-behind party is dropped from the column to check on
whether it is being trailed, it should peel off from the front of the main
body and enter the bush without halting the latter's advance.  Its maneuver
is S-shaped so that it takes up automatically a full ambush posture instead
of being a simple fire block.

     The column moves on and through the stay-behind group (2 fire teams,
with a machinegun in the down-trail team).  The forward team springs the
trap as the enemy party comes even.  The rear team fires only if the enemy
doubles back or is too numerous for the forward weapons.

     Other than in attack on road columns, the enemy does not appear to use
front-and-rear ambushes, i.e., the delivery of surprise fire from cover by
a block up front, quickly followed by an attack on rear or midway of the
column.  Except along the wood line of a clearing the "impenetrable" jungle
does not lend itself to such tactic in assault against a column moving by
trail.  More favorable to the design of the VC and NVA is their use of a
killing fire from out of concealment against the head of the column from a
wide spot in the trail.  This may be automatic fire or a command-detonated
mine.  Their Chinese made version of the Claymore mine is a potent weapon
when so employed.  It may be hidden within a hollow tree or fixed with
camouflage in a clump of foliage.  The mine is set to command a long
stretch of trail and is one of the hazards of moving along it.

     There is no warning and no follow-through; it is a one-weapon affair. 
During Operation Attleboro, a single command-detonated Claymore set in a
tree killed or wounded 26 men strung out over 40 meters of trail.  It was
fired from 5 meters forward of the front man.  The column was rushing from
battle urgency and the scout element did not take enough time to look over
the ground thoroughly.  The first scout alone had been permitted to pass
uptrail beyond the weapon.  Obviously the formation--point and the front of
the main body--had become closed too tightly.  On the wide trail the
advance was moving in a fashion that served only to put more people at the
mercy of the weapon.  Had they been following exactly in single file, each
body would have given more protection to the men that followed.

     Periodic "cloverleafing" or some variation of that movement by the
column in movement is supposed to be SOP for field operations in Vietnam. 
The object is to beat out a limited area around the base of the command
during a security halt or rest halt or before the troops set up the night
defense.  Four patrols may be sent out anywhere from 100 to 500 meters for
this all-around sweep.

     Among the cloverleaf variations possible, one has clearly obvious
advantages.  The preferred option, "A," affords a double check timewise
both forward and rearward of the column's route of advance and makes
maximum use of the deployment.  At all stages of the sweep it also exposes
a smaller element to the danger of surprise and ambush.  The "buttonhook,"
used extensively by the Australians for ambushing an enemy force that is
following one of their columns, is in essence the covering of one quadrant
of the four-circle cloverleaf.  It is executed usually over a much smaller
radius.

     When a company- or platoon-size patrol conducts sweeps of the vicinity
before setting up for night defense, the priorities are: 
     (1)  The arc covering its line of advance into the ground.
     (2)  The intervening ground between the perimeter and the LZ, and
     (3)  The sector judged least defensible.  Particularly if darkness is
          imminent, organization of the position (meaning the assignment of
          sectors and placing of men and weapons, but not necessarily
          digging in) precedes the dispatch of watering parties and the
          placement of LP's.

     Division and brigade commanders afield stoutly contend that the
cloverleaf kind of precaution is always taken by patrols, or by a company
moving cross country in search of the enemy.  The same story is told at
battalion.  Analysis of more than 100 company operations at the fighting
level reveals that the story very rarely stands up.  The average junior
leader simply gives lip service to the principle.  Just as trails are used
despite all taboos, most of the time little scouting takes place outward
from the U.S. column traversing them, despite all admonition.  Contributing
to the almost habitual carelessness of junior leaders is a besetting
vagueness on the part of many superiors in stating the mission and making
it specific as to its several essentials.  The unit should not be told to
"check out" a certain area, or to "run a patrol through the jungle patch
ahead and return," as if it were the simple problem of putting a policeman
on a beat.  Each patrol should have a stated purpose.  It risks hazard to
gain something; it must therefore be told what it is after.  Prisoners? 
Ambushing of the enemy?  Destruction of a bridge?  Caches?  Location of a
suspected base camp?  Observe signs of enemy movement but not engage?  Seek
a trail entrance?  The list of possibilities is long.  But if the average
leader is given only a general instruction he will comply in the easiest
way, and nine times out of ten that means taking the trail, probably the
same trail going and coming.  If he is told at the start, "Be at LZ Lazy
Zebra by 1800 for extraction," and he discovers that too little time has
been allowed to do anything well, the door is open for him to go forth and
do all things badly.  Command must safeguard its upcoming patrol against
the danger of becoming trapped from having beaten over the same old route.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                  LESSON EIGHT - THE COMPANY IN MOVEMENT

     One large unresolved question is what formation is best for the rifle
company in movement under the conditions of the Vietnam war where the enemy
is highly elusive, seeks contact only when he expects to stage a surprise,
is adept at breaking contact and slipping away, and operates in a
countryside that well serves these tactics.

     The VC and NVA are not everywhere, though they are apt to be met
anywhere, and hence all movement should be regulated accordingly.  No
deployment is militarily sound which assumes that the enemy is not close
by.  If that axiom were not true, there would be no rush to form the
defensive perimeter when the unit is dropped on the landing zone.  Yet it
is too often disregarded in jungle movement by leaders who refuse to
believe that the enemy can strike without warning from out of nowhere

     There is a great variety to the countryside.  The less-dense jungle
has more the nature of a tropical forest in the matted thorn bush, clumped
bamboo, bamboo thicket, creepers, and lianas do not greatly impede
movement.  There are vast stretches of still more open country, almost
treeless, flats covered only with elephant grass standing higher than any
living thing, barren volcanic hills, paddy lands uninterrupted save by
their own banks, and dikes that stretch on for miles.

     Some areas are densely populated.  Others are wholly abandoned, even
by the enemy.  In January, 1967 a Special Forces patrol, which had been on
its own for 32 days, marched 230 kilometers in 22 days without seeing one
human being, domesticated animal, or habitation.

     Vietnam is not "mostly untamed jungle."  Large and decisively
important parts of it are cultivated flat land denuded of forest and bush
except along the stream banks.  Almost as much of it is fertile, relatively
flat, not heavily forested or overgrown, but still undeveloped and almost
deserted.  In the central plateau there are broad lava flows where no grass
grows.  Some of the volcanic hills are boulder and slab-strewn and almost
barren of vegetation.

     Any of these landscapes is likely to become battleground, and several
of them in combination may be crossed by a rifle company in a single day's
march.

     The question of what formation best serves military movement over such
a greatly diversified land may be answered only by thinking of what is
being sought: (1) security, (2) control, and (3) concentration of fire
power without undue loss of time and personnel.  These are not in any way
separate aims; each reacts upon the others.  Security and control are
desired so that fire concentration can be achieved when nothing else counts
more.

     So the precept must follow: the more complicated a formation and the
more numerous its parts, the greater the danger that control will be lost
in a moment of emergency, especially when the unit is moving over
countryside the nature of which prohibits visual contact between the
various elements.

     Yet "the wedge," which has numerous variations, is the formation that
the average U.S. rifle company commander prefers to use during advance into
enemy country.  It is extremely difficult to control during marches over
cut-up ground and possesses no inherent advantage in bringing fire power to
bear quickly against the threatened quarter.  In fact, it has several
built-in handicaps.

     The forward platoon in center and the two platoons right and left each
use a point, with scouts out.  So there are never less than seven elements
to control.  That is several too many, should the body have to re-form
suddenly to meet an assault from an unexpected direction.  Thus formed, the
company extends over a wider area than if the columns were more compact,
though the advantage is decidedly marginal.  Nothing else is to be said in
favor of the wedge, for its design neither strengthens security on the move
nor favors rapid and practical deployment for combat.  If the formation
should be hit from either flank, greater confusion will ensue than with a
simpler pattern.  Should the enemy be set up and ready to fight on a
concealed broad front directly to the fore, all three columns are likely to
become engaged before the commander has a chance to weigh whether full-
scale involvement is desirable.

     On the other hand, suppose that the company is making its approach
march in 2-column formation.  The width between columns should be
approximately equal to their length when the terrain permits.  If either
column is hit from the flank and faces toward the fire, the other is
automatically in place to serve as a reserve and protect against a turning
maneuver.  Further, if the advance guard (scouts and point) draws fire in
volume signifying enemy determination to stand, the force is in position
either to be committed whole at once or to fight on a narrower front with
half of its strength while keeping a 50 percent reserve.

     When the enemy fire and the condition of the advance element permit,
the scouts and point should displace to rearward as the company shifts to
line of skirmishers, lest the whole organization be drawn willy-nilly into
a full-scale commitment.  In the Vietnam fighting, according to the data
basis, the latter initial disarrangement occurs approximately half the time
in attacks on a fortified position.  The scouts or the men in the point
become engaged and take losses; the lead platoon becomes scattered and
disorganized in the effort to extricate them; the fire line thereafter
gradually becomes reknit on ground too far forward, greatly to its
disadvantage and harshly limiting the supporting air and artillery fires.

     Much is heard in Vietnam about VC and NVA employment of the inverted L
ambush.  This tactic gets its effects from an intensifying concentration of
fire.  The enemy normally fights out of timber or other natural cover, and
the flanking side usually runs parallel to a trail.  The twin-column
company formation is far more properly disposed to cope with the L than is
the wedge or any eccentric formation, particularly if it is moving with a
few flankers out, a practice it should adopt wherever natural conditions
permit.  In fact, almost anywhere that the enemy can use the L ambush
practically, our people can use flankers to serve as a buffer.

     The righthand column, in the correct position, needs only face right
to engage.  The lefthand column moves into line against the enemy force
blocking the line of movement.  The company CP is located according to the
intensity of fire and availability of cover.

     So confronted, the enemy loses any initial advantage in fire or
maneuver, and his problem of collecting forces to alter the terms of the
contest is probably more complex, since he had planned to execute a set
piece.  The data basis is too limited to warrant generalizing about VC-NVA
tactical arrangements for exploiting the L ambush.  But in the few examples
when the fight went to a finish, the enemy reserves were placed to support
the vertical bar of the L.  This is the logical way to employ them if an
ultimate envelopment is the object.

     Whether to accept line-against-line engagement on these terms, however
equal, is the prime question for the U.S. force commander from the start of
action.  He may not have any option initially because his position may have
been weakened by early losses before he was able to get the feel of his
problem.  At any stage it is preferable that, maintaining loose contact in
the interim, he backs away with the main body as promptly as he can.  At
the same time he should call for maximum striking power against the enemy
positions.  The L ambush, by reason of its configuration, is an ideal
target for field artillery and tactical air operating in combination.  The
vertical bar is the prime target for the artillery--gun-target line
permitting--because it can be worked over with maximum economy and minimum
shifting of the guns.  The horizontal bar is the proper mark for TAC Air
because the boundaries of the run may be more readily marked manually when
a withdrawal is perpendicular to the line of advance than when the strike
parallels the line of advance and withdrawal.

     There is one postscript dealing with the enemy use of the L ambush. 
The examples of record indicate that the enemy reserve will maneuver in an
attempt to block our line of withdrawal.  The effort normally takes the
form of setting the ambush along the first stream or trail crossing on the
immediate rear.  Withdrawal over the same route used in the advance is
therefore to be avoided.  The movement should be an oblique from the open
flank where the enemy has not engaged.
                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                 LESSON NINE - RUSES, DECOYS, AND AMBUSHES

     To begin, at least one generalization is permissible.  The enemy 
-- VC or NVA -- has a full bag of tricks, a fair number of which we now
understand.  Practically without exception they are not intricate.  Most 
of them depend for effectiveness on creating one of two illusions: either 
(1), our side has caught the enemy off guard; or (2), he is ready, waiting,
and weak, and we have only to make the most of the opportunity.

     One other generalization might well follow.  The U.S. unit commander,
if he is to keep his guard up against ruses and ambushes, must be receptive
to the counsel of his subordinates and draw on the total of information
concerning the immediate presence of the enemy that has been collected by
his people.  Nothing more greatly distinguishes U.S. generalship in 
Vietnam than the ready communion between our higher commanders and their
subordinates at all levels in the interest of making operations more
efficient.  If a general sets the example, why should any junior leader
hold back?  For his own purposes, the best and the most reliable
intelligence that a small unit commander can go on is that which his own
men gather through movement and observation in the field.

     On the bright side, the record shows unmistakably, with numerous cases
in point out of the 1966-7 period of fighting operations, that the average
U.S. soldier today in Vietnam has a sharper scouting sense and is more
alert to signs of the enemy than the man of Korea or World War II.  The
environment has whetted that keenness and quickened his appreciation of any
indication that people other than his own are somewhere close by, either in
a wilderness or in an apparently deserted string of hamlets.  He feels it
almost instinctively when the unit is on a cold trail.  The heat of ashes
that look long dead to the eye, a few grains of moist rice still clinging
to the bowl, the freshness of footprints where wind and weather have not
had time to blur the pattern in the dust, fresh blood on a castoff bandage,
the sound of brush crackling in a way not suggesting other than movement by
man -- he gets these things.  Walking through elephant grass, he will note
where over a fresh-made track the growth has been beaten down and bruised,
and with moisture still fresh on the broken grass he will guess that a body
of the enemy has moved through within the hour.  These things are in the
record.  Also in it are words like these: "We entered the village.  It was
empty.  But the smell of their bodies was strong, as if they had just got
out.  They have a different smell than we do."

     How the quickening process works, how the senses sharpen when soldiers
are alert to all phenomena about them, and how a commander may profit by
collecting all that his men know and feel about the developing situation,
is well illustrated by quoting directly from a post-combat interview of a
patrol out of 25th Division in early 1967:

     Lieutenant: "I noticed that between 1700 and 1800 all traffic stopped
within the village.  That was early and therefore unusual.  The workers
disappeared.  Women came along, rounded up the water buffalo, and quit the
area.  People in the houses near the perimeter ate a quick evening meal and
go out.  Everything went silent.  I knew then something would happen."

     Sergeant: "I saw people leaving the house to my right front about 25
meters.  Then directly to my front, 150 meters off, the family left at the
same time.  We took fire from the house when the enemy came on."

     It is the task of the unit commander not only to stimulate a scouting
faculty in all hands but to welcome and weigh all field intelligence that
comes of so doing.  Even the hunch of one man far down the line is never to
be brushed off; he may have a superior instinct for sensing a situation.

     In one of the more tragic incidents during 1966 operations near the
Cambodian border, a company commander was warned by a Specialist 4
artillery observer before it happened.  the company had spent the night in
defensive perimeter.  An NVA soldier had walked into one of its trail
ambushes during the night, and the men working the LP's reported their
certainty that they had heard human movement all during the night in the
grass beyond them.  When the company broke camp soon after first light, the
Specialist 4, viewing the ground over which it would advance that morning,
said: "Captain, don't go that way, you are walking into an ambush."  This
advice was disregarded.  The ambush was there.  The losses were grievous. 
Developments proved doubly that the Specialist 4 was a responsible soldier
whose judgments deserved respect.  In the ensuing fight, the captain was
wounded and could no longer function.  The Specialist 4 took charge of the
operation and with help brought the survivors through.

     Whenever the enemy makes his presence obvious and conspicuous, whether
during movement or in a stationary and seemingly unguarded posture, it is
time to be wary and to ask the question: "Is this the beginning of some
design of his own, intended to suck us in by making us believe that we are
about to snare him?"  This question should be asked before any operation,
whether it involves a division moving against the enemy or a small patrol
or rifle company beating out the bush in search of his presence.  The
people we are fighting are not innocents and are rarely careless.  They
bait their traps the greater part of the time by making themselves so seem.

     In Operation Nathan Hale, June 1966, the opening onfall of the NVA
forces engaging was against three CIDG (Civilian Irregular Defense Group 
-- a paramilitary organization) companies at and around the Special Forces
camp at Dong Tre.  In this, they were partially successful.  The one
company outposting the nearby hills was overrun and took heavy losses.  The
NVA was waiting outside the camp to strike the expected relief column; but
the CIDG Force, located inside the Dong Tre camp, was saved from disaster
when its ARVN (Army of the Republic of Vietnam) commander wisely resisted
the temptation to send it to relieve the beleaguered company.  During the
day that followed air observers over the general area reported seeing enemy
groups in large numbers threading the valleys leading away from Dong Tre,
all moving in one direction.  That was the picture the enemy intended
should be seen; he had already chosen his battle ground. As the U.S.
reaction expanded and the general fight developed, our forces deployed into
well-prepared and extremely hot LZ's where our softening-up fires had had
mainly the effect of drawing attention to where the landings would take
place.  That in the end Operation Nathan Hale could be rightly claimed as
an American victory does not alter the fact that much of it need not have
been won in the hardest possible way.  North Vietnam made much of it, and
in documents published to troops boasted that more than one thousand
Americans had been killed, an approximately 10 to 1 exaggeration.  With a
more perfect collation of available intelligence from the start and in the
first days as the units deployed, it might have been a more resounding U.S.
victory.

     Here, one clear distinction is in order.  The NVA and VC are neither
everywhere nor phantomlike.  Though they try to appear so, they are of
human flesh and must respond to their own nature, irrespective of the
disciplines given them within military organization.  On the trail, or
during any movement in which they have no reason to suspect the near
presence of a U.S. or allied force, they are incessant chatterers and
otherwise noisy.  Repeatedly they get sandbagged for carelessness.  As to
their being everywhere, it would be easier to dispose of them if that were
true.  Some of our line commanders at the lower levels get the idea after
fighting for a while in Vietnam that, whenever our columns move, the enemy
knows and invariably shadows them.  Nothing in the data basis confirms it,
and indeed, with our vastly superior mobility due to helicopter deployment
over great distance, it would be humanly impossible for him to shadow every
assault by the rifle company or every prowl by the patrol.  What the record
does say unmistakably is that a fair portion of the time he manages to get
on our heels.  The moral plainly is that, in all movement afield, the
column should proceed as if detection may have occurred early, and should
take the necessary precautions to avert surprise.

     It is a different problem when there is clear reason to believe that
the enemy knows of the presence of U.S. forces.  Take one example of
numerous such incidents.  This one is from Operation Crazy Horse.  A
company column had been proceeding via a broad valley along the river
banks.  At some low-lying hills it was held up for five minutes by direct
fire from two or three rifles at range of 100 meters or thereabouts.  The
exchange was broken off without casualties on either side when the enemy
faded back.  There was reason to suspect that the fire had come from an
enemy outpost, so placed not only to sound the alarm but to keep the attack
moving along the line of the enemy withdrawal.  The suspicion was well
founded because not far beyond the initial encounter lay a well-prepared,
fortified position, with machineguns sited on ridges and the garrison
standing to, ready to defend them.

     A few VC or NVA soldiers, acting as couriers, carriers, or such,
having a chance meeting with a U.S. column in movement, might get off a
quick shot or two before scuttling into the bush.  But any such casual
group has a getaway on its mind primarily.  This kind of haphazard fire is
quite different from steady delivery of small arms fire from one position,
though the latter is in small volume and persists for only a few minutes. 
The latter, seemingly aimed to check or delay movement, may more likely
have the prime object of inviting it on.  It should alert the unit
commander to the probable imminence of a prolonged fire fight, and he
should review his preparations accordingly.
     
     So we speak here of the obvious or overt move, or attention-getting
activity in any form.  Even a minor weapons exchange always alerts a unit. 
But beyond that, the commander should take heed of any unusual
manifestation of sight or sound when his troops are seeking contact with
the enemy.  One illustration comes out of Operation Paul Revere IV, and
while there is none other exactly like it, simple logic gives it overall
significance.

     The rifle company had been moving over fairly open country not far
from the Cambodian border since first light.  In late afternoon, it several
times encountered NVA soldiers moving singly and the scouts or point traded
fires with them, with varying results.  Then as the company approached a
village, it heard the tumult of voices, shouts and cries, from children,
men, and women, as of many people making haste to get away before the
Americans arrived.  But is it a natural thing for people fleeing for cover,
in the face of an armed advance, to call attention to their departure? 
Without firing, the company deployed and surrounded the village, to find it
empty.  It then moved on, following in the same direction that the
"refugees" had taken.  Dark was at hand.  Not far beyond the village the
company came to fairly clear ground slightly elevated that looked suitable
for night defense.  Watering parties moved out to a nearby creek to
replenish supply.  Before they could return, and while the perimeter was
still not more than half formed, the position was attacked by an NVA force
in company-plus strength.  It had been deployed on ground over which the
watering parties moved.  The most heartening part of the story is that the
U.S. company, on its first time in battle, sprang to its task, got its
defensive circle tied together quickly, and in a four-hour fight under
wholly adverse conditions greatly distinguished itself.  In view of the
scenario, any conclusion that the enemy just happened to be set at the
right point is a little too much to allow for coincidence.

     Mystification, like over optimistic anticipation, rates high in the
techniques of deception.  We use ruses in our own cover planning; that the
enemy does the same, and that his designs are more primitive, relying less
on elaborate charades and more on the foibles of man's nature, should
occasion little surprise.  Traps beset us only because of a reluctance on
the part of junior leaders to give the other side credit for that small
measure of cleverness.  To outthink the enemy, it is necessary only to
reflect somewhat more deeply.

     During the Tou Morong battle (Operation Hawthorne II) in June 1966, a
reconnaissance platoon had a rather unproductive morning.  It came at last
to an enemy camp that was deserted.  Several meters beyond it the main
trail branched off where two trails came together, both of them winding
uphill.  At the intersection was a sign reading in Vietnamese: "Friend Go
This Way."  There were two pointing fingers, one aimed at each uphill
trail.  It was a time for caution and for reporting the find to higher
command.  But the commander split his force and the divided platoon moved
upward via both trails.  En route, both columns exchanged fires with a few
NVA soldiers who held their ground on both trails.  There were light losses
on both sides.  The two columns began to converge again as they approached
a draw commanded by a ridge fold from both sides.  There they ran into
killing fire and were pinned in a fight that lasted through that afternoon,
all night, and until next morning.  Before it ended, the great part of two
U.S. rifle companies and all the supporting fires that could be brought to
bear had been called in to help extricate the eight surviving able-bodied
men and the wounded of what had been a 42-man platoon.

     In warfare fought largely platoon against platoon and company against
company, the true situation is not made plain in most cases until the two
sides begin a close exchange of flat trajectory fires.  Until then we may
speculate, but we do not know the reality; the hard facts of reality can be
developed only stage by stage as the fire fight progresses.  During the
approach, however, the leader takes nothing for granted and continues to
look for a plant.  The enemy has many ruses, and if something new and novel
did not appear from day to day he would soon lose all ability to surprise. 
That is why all such items in company or higher command experience should
be reported and circulated for the benefit of all concerned.  It is only
through cross-checking and the accumulation of more data that the larger
significance of any one action, device, or stratagem may be given full
weight.

     Two days after Christmas, 1966, two NVA prisoners fell into our hands
in III Corps Zone.  They both told this story.  A group of American POW's
were being held in an enemy base camp near the Cambodian border.  The NVA
prisoners gave the same numbers and pointed to the same spot on the map. 
The chance to liberate a group of fellow soldiers was certain to appeal to
Americans at this or any other season of the year.  Nothing in the incident
itself was calculated to arouse suspicion.  So with utmost secrecy, an
expedition was mounted.

     But it happened that on the same day on the far side of the country
two NVA soldiers surrendered to forces of the 1st Air Cavalry Division
operating in Binh Dinh Province.  They were followed in by an ARVN soldier
who told of having just escaped from an enemy prison camp.  These three men
related a common experience.  They had seen three U.S. soldiers of the 1st
Air Cavalry Division in captivity at a spot not far from the Soui Ca
valley.  One was a "Negro with tattoos on his left arm," a detail of
description which should have raised an eyebrow, the U.S. Negro soldier not
being given to that practice.  On checking the records, the division found
it had no MIA's tallying with the descriptions.  But thinking the prisoners
were from some other U.S. outfit, it prepared to launch, again with utmost
secrecy, a rescue expedition.

     The other rescue party had gone forth several days earlier and found
nothing.  But the try had been made in battalion strength.  The air cavalry
division also mounted a battalion operation and put a heavy preparatory
fire on the landing zone.  This bag also proved to be empty.  There was no
sign any prisoners had been at the spot indicated.  The coincidence,
followed up by the double failure, is the best reason for believing that,
had one company or less been sent, it would have deployed into an ambush. 
There is no final proof.

     Under hot pursuit, the enemy is adept at quickly changing into peasant
garb and hiding his identity by mingling with the civilian crowd.  That is
why he carries several sets of clothing in his haversack and why we find
them in his caches.  The data basis shows that he will go on the attack
using women and children to screen his advance.  When no option but
surrender or death is left him, he will employ the same kind of protection. 
During Operation Cedar Falls, in January 1967, women and children would
come first out of a hut or bunker making the noises and gesture of the
helpless in distress.  They would be followed by the VC, some with arms
lowered, others with hands empty and raised.  Troops are able to cope with
this problem without any cost to life; but it requires extraordinary
alertness coupled with restraint.

     Ambushing occurs only when men become careless.  With any truce or
cease-fire, there comes the temptation to relax and neglect accustomed
safeguards, and the enemy takes all possible advantage of it.  The
Christmas afternoon ambushing of a patrol in 1st Infantry Division sector
is one instance.  The patrol advanced on a broad front sweep across a rice
paddy directly toward a tree line.  The ambush was set and ready to fire
from just inside the tree line.  If the patrol had to cross the paddy, it
took the one worst way to do it, particularly since the dikes and banks
afforded at least partial cover for several columns.

     To advance along a trail up a draw under an open sky without first
scouting the shoulders or knobs above it, or putting strafing fires on
them, is the hard road to entrapment.  Those knobs are a favored siting for
machinegun emplacements by the NVA and the VC, the draw is the beaten zone,
and the bunker roofs are seldom more than a foot above ground (fig. 18).

     That the platoon leading the company column makes the passage safely
without drawing one shot by no means indicates it is unguarded.  To the
contrary, the enemy by choice tends to let it pass, so as to involve the
entire company.  If fire were to be placed on the point or leading files of
the first platoon, the column would recoil and then deploy for a sweep.  To
spring such an ambush, the enemy will risk allowing the lead platoon to get
on his rear since in jungle country, where there is no trail into the
emplaced guns, being on the rear begets no real advantage.  The platoon
must either double back over the trail at the risk of being ambushed on the
other side of the draw or it must spend an hour hacking its way through
jungle to get to the target.

     The ambushing of a road column, done by maneuver bodies rather than by
fire out of fixed positions, necessarily takes a quite different form.  It
is usually a double strike out of cover, not made simultaneously, but so
synchronized and weighted that the stopping-stalling effect is produced
first by the weaker element against the head of the column, the main body
then moving to roll up the force from its tail.  The two moves are timed
closely enough together that the column is engaged from both ends before it
can deploy and face toward either danger (fig. 19).

     The VC-NVA will spring this kind of trap only out of slightly higher
ground where there is some kind of cover for automatic guns within 50
meters of the road or less.  The bunching of any column simply makes the
opportunity more favorable and the risk safer.  The VC-NVA prefer a bend-
in-the-road situation for setting such a trap.  The reason is obvious: out
of sight, the tail of the column does not sense what is happening to the
head in the critical moments, a handicap that increases the chance that the
column will split apart and try to fight two separate actions.  Given
adequate air cover (either Air Force or Army reconnaissance aircraft or
gunships), any column would be immune to such attack.  In lieu of these, an
artillery dusting of the flankward ground wherever its characteristics are
favorable to an entrapment, and just prior to the coming up of the column,
would be a great disarranger.  Is artillery used that way in Vietnam?  Too
rarely, which is not the fault of the gunners.  The trouble is that some
commanders think of a road march as just that and nothing more; by so doing
they scorn elementary precautions.

     There is still another dimension to this subject, far more sinister in
its import.  That the enemy will employ the live bodies of his own men as
decoys to lure our troops forward and set them up before a hastily
contrived ambush or well-concealed but fortified position, the data basis
leaves no room for doubting.  It shows, furthermore, that live decoys are
used at such short range and so fully exposed to our fire as to create a
better than even prospect that their lives will be forfeit.

     If any such ruse were to be employed regularly by the enemy, the trick
would shortly wear itself out, which is true of any stratagem.  It has,
however, been employed often enough that his occasional recourse to it
should be accepted as fact, though American conditioning is such as to make
us skeptical that this degree of fanaticism is possible even in the Viet
Cong.  There are eight incidents in the record of this nature.

     In two incidents, the physical circumstances were such as to exclude
the possibility that they just happened that way through accident rather
than by deliberate design.  Taken together, their lesson is so glaring as
to warrant saying to any unit commander or patrol leader: "If you come upon
a jungle clearing and you see two or three or even one enemy soldier with
back turned, or you are moving fairly in the open, and you see a few NVA or
VC moving at distance with backs turned, never facing about, watch out! 
The chances are very good that you are being led into a trap."

     The turned back is the surest sign.  It is positively enticing.  It
reads like the invitation on the small airport truck: "Follow Me!"  The
effect is to nourish the hope that the maneuvering formation has caught the
enemy unaware and is on the track of something big.  That may be half true,
but the something big is as the enemy planned it.

     Incident No. 1.  A 1st Infantry Division platoon with 32 men was
patrolling not far from War Zone C.  Several hundred meters short of its
turnaround point, it entered upon a jungle clearing, keyhole-shaped, about
150 meters from tree line to tree line.  In column, the patrol strung out
along the trail until all but the last four men were in the open.  By then
the head of the column was two-thirds of the way across the clearing.  At
that juncture, the point saw three VC soldiers, backs turned.  They stood
15 meters to the fore, 10 meters short of the tree line.  Without turning,
they darted away obliquely toward the trees.  The lead files twisted about
to pursue.  The M-79 gunner got off a round and thought he hit one or two
of the men just as they disappeared into the tree line.  The turning of the
column in pursuit of the men spread it neatly in front of the killing
ambush, arrayed just inside the tree line.  Is it conceivable that with the
ambushers watching the approach of the column over several minutes and
getting ready to blast it down, the three pigeons standing with backs
turned not more than 30 meters from them were unwarned?

     Incident No. 2      An American company was on a search-and-destroy
mission close to the Cambodian border.  Its scouts saw two NVA soldiers
standing 200 meters away on a small hill, their backs turned
(at A).  These decoys walked off to the westward without ever turning.
The company followed.  Getting too close to the Cambodian border, the
commander called for artillery fires on the bush into which the two decoys
had disappeared (at B) rather than take the chance of pursuing them into
neutral territory.  The company then turned back to the pivotal point from
which it had started westward, feeling the chance was lost.  It paused
there a moment before marching south.  Just then an NCO happened to look
back at the hill where the two NVA's were first sighted.  There stood two
more figures in khaki, wearing military helmets (at A).  They too had their
backs turned, though the U.S. company had been moving about conspicuously
in the open for almost an hour.  The two pigeons stood right where the
others had been, within killing range, not more than 200 meters away.  The
company did not fire them -- and that was a mistake.  The two NVA's never
did face about.  Deploying, the company advanced toward them, moving
broadside against the face of the hill (at C).  It got within a stone's
throw of the base before there was any fire.  Then it broke like a storm
-- automatic, grenade rocket.  On the crest of the low hill was a major NVA 
force in concealment, with earth protection.  The U.S. line was pinned at
once.  In the three-hour engagement that followed, it took a bloody
beating.  In the end, what was left of the enemy garrison withdrew to
Cambodia.  Accident?  Coincidence?  Common sense rejects the idea.  The
enemy baited a trap, perhaps not too skillfully.  But it worked.

     The enemy does employ agents and double agents.  He does contrive to
plant stories through them which are accepted at face value.  He does
resort to such stale devices as planting a fake operations order on the
corpse of an officer.  Such hoaxes are occasionally swallowed whole instead
of being taken with a grain of salt, better yet, a shakerful.

     These, then are the ruses, decoys, and ambushes that hurt worst, not
the narrow fire blocks rigged at the turning of a jungle trail, which
seldom take more than a small toll.  In these small affairs, engagement
usually takes place at not more than 10 to 20 meters' range.  At any longer
distance than that, particularly in night operations, fire is not apt to be
successful.  The enemy has no special magic in that setting, with that
tactic.  We can beat him at his own game; the record so proves.  The big
ambushes, in which he contrives to mousetrap anything from a platoon-size
patrol to the greater part of a battalion, are his forte, his big gambit,
his one hold on the future.  Foil these, deny him surprise on the defense,
frustrate the designs by which he inflicts shock losses in the first stage
of encounter, and there will be nothing going for him that will offset his
dwindling power to organize and press hard in the attack.

     The job can be done.  We can manage it by a more careful scrutiny of
the seeming opportunity -- the thing that looks too good to be true.  We
can avoid the staged entrapments of the enemy by reacting always, to any
and every indication of his presence, as if he is right there in the
foreground in main strength.

     Simply for the sake of emphasis, it is here repeated that in this war
a lone rifle shot means little or nothing.  An automatic weapon opening
fire usually means business.  When two or more automatic weapons open at
one time at close range, something big is almost certain to begin.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                      LESSON TEN - FIELD INTELLIGENCE

     In the battle of Bu Gia Map fought in May 1966, a reinforced battalion
from the 101st Airborne Division engaged for two days against a large enemy
force one day's march from the Cambodian border.  By making the wisest
possible use of supporting artillery and air power, the commander destroyed
the greater part of an NVA battalion.  It was a resounding victory.

     Yet it pivoted altogether on a persistent questing for intelligence by
men in the unit at the time of the operation.  To begin, the battalion had
no target of real promise, and after the first few days of searching the
mission seemed futile.  On a hunch, the commander made a personal
reconnaissance by Huey to an abandoned airstrip 30 minutes flight distance
from his base.

     There he drew fire.  He quickly redeployed his battalion into this
area by airmobile assault.  Then all companies, save the security force at
the new base, began "checkerboarding," or combing out the general area in
all directions.  The commander stressed one thing above all else; "We must
get prisoners."  The first night ambushes succeeded in taking one NVA
private alive, but he was emotionally overwrought and his information
proved of no great value.  An ambush patrol on the second night struck pay
dirt and captured another NVA soldier.  This POW was sick from malaria. 
The battalion commander's philosophy was "treat POW's as nicely as
possible," for this "gentle" treatment of prisoners had paid off before. 
After the prisoner had received medication, warm blankets, and food, he
sang like a canary, located his unit on the map, and volunteered to lead a
force there.  Through no fault of his, when the friendly forces surrounded
his unit's camp, they found it abandoned.  The bird had escaped the cage
minutes before.  On the fourth day, with the commander still pressing his
men to "take them alive," a patrol wounded and captured an NVA sergeant. 
He described the enemy force that lay in ambush directly to the westward
and gave the location of the fortified hill as being one kilometer away --
a position until then unsuspected.  The capture had occurred on a new trail
leading to the defended hill.  The success of the expedition turned on this
one small event.

     In the Tou Morong campaign of June 1966, four battalions made a great
sweep for three days over a far spread of difficult country and converged,
toward closing out the operation, still empty-handed.  Nowhere had they
encountered enemy in force.  On the afternoon of the third day, with full
withdrawal imminent, the commander of the 1st Battalion, 327th Infantry, on
reaching the Tou Morong outpost (the purpose of the sweep was to relieve
the garrison there) talked to a sublieutenant of Popular Forces who had
been long in the area.  The American asked him: "Where do you think the
enemy is?"  The map was brought out.  The Vietnamese put his finger on a
village and said: "Whenever we patrol, we find NVA around there."  The
American believed him, or at least felt the information warranted a second
try.  So the plan was altered.  The battalion of the 101st Airborne
Division stayed in the area and began grinding away.  The battle of Tou
Morong -- a highlight of U.S. campaigning in 1966 - developed from this one
incident.

     Operation Thayer-Irving, mounted in the 1966 autumn, was in its early
stages underproductive.  During the first weeks, troops beat out much
country, spent much energy, and took light losses for little gain.  A
feeling of futility developed.  In the second phase the search turned
toward the coast line of Binh Dinh east of Highway NO. 1.  In early morning
a troop commander of cavalry making a reconnaissance by gunship saw three
khaki-clad figures standing in the street of a fishing village.  Too late,
they ducked for cover.  Capitalizing on this seemingly insignificant scrap
of intelligence, Operation Irving became a shining battle success.  And not
only in terms of enemy losses: more prisoners were taken than in any show
of that year.  The abrupt change in fortune came of one piece of fresh
intelligence collected by one man.

     From the data basis could be lifted numerous other encouraging
examples of the same kind, though on a smaller scale.  However, there are
also negative aspects to several of the operations which we have already
considered in a favorable and positive light.

     In one campaign, on the evening before the conversation that turned a
futile exercise into a productive battle, fighting developed "off the map,"
along the low ground of the flat and treeless valley south of the mountain
area being worked over by the maneuvering battalions.  One U.S. artillery
battery had been deployed there by helicopter to provide covering fire for
a rifle battalion.  A rifle company was sent along to guard its base.  At
the same time an ARVN battalion was marching up the main road, over flat
ground, toward its objective.  Less than 700 meters from the U.S. position,
the ARVN battalion became heavily engaged when it turned aside to bivouac
on the finger of a low-lying ridge.  Several U.S. advisers were along.  Men
of the two U.S. units deploying into the LZ could not hear the sounds of
the fight over the noise of Hueys and Chinooks landing and leaving.  Within
a few minutes, the U.S. rifle company also became engaged with an NVA force
on the wooded nose of the nearest finger of the same low-lying ridge, not
more than 300 meters from the American battery.  The artillery weapons were
never turned around and they took no part in the fight.  The U.S. advisers
with the ARVN battalion and the command at the artillery base were on the
radio telephone, talking to one another.  But only fragmentary information
was exchanged between them.  Neither force got an understanding of the
other's immediate problem and situation, though one was not more than a 10-
minute walk from the other and the broad valley was clear of enemy forces. 
Had either been more perceptive, more disposed to talk things out fully, an
NVA platoon might have been taken whole or destroyed and the significance
of the attack on the ARVN battalion by at least two NVA companies would
have come clear.

     In Operation Thayer, which became largely a dry well, a 12-man patrol
from the cavalry division moved along with an interpreter from the National
Police.  While it paused by a stream to wash feet and break out rations, an
aged Vietnamese woman came along the trail next to it.  She was asked:
"Have you seen any VC?"  She replied: "There are three right now in my
village down this trail."  The cavalrymen followed along, engaged and
killed an enemy outguard of several men, took losses themselves in the
exchange of fire, then learned there were outguards posted generally around
the village.  They concluded that the place was held by an enemy force in
at least company strength.  The time was late afternoon.  Because other
problems pressed the brigade, the opening was not taken.  The patrol was
withdrawn before there was any real testing of enemy strength, and by next
day the bird had flown.  The point is only that what had at first seemed an
unlikely source of information about enemy presence proved to be wholly
valid.

     The besetting problem in Vietnam is to find the enemy.  It is like
hunting for the needle in the haystack only if the unit commander views it
as a task primarily for higher levels and does not have all of his senses
and all of his people directed toward systematizing the search so that it
will pay off.  His scout elements are only a first hold on the undertaking;
they probe over a limited area of a large countryside prolific with cover
and natural camouflage.  Out of their truly productive contacts resulting
directly from maneuver emerges only a small fraction of the hard
information leading to our most successful finds and strikes.  The greater
part of it derives from careful interrogation of people met along the way,
interrogation that neither overlooks nor discounts any possible source. 
One new unit, operating in Paul Revere IV, took over a village in late
afternoon.  Finding the people gone and the livestock fresh, it concluded
that an NVA force was probably close at hand.  So the men killed the pigs
and left the chickens, figuring that if the enemy returned by night, the
fowl might sound the alarm.  The gambit failed; the enemy, attacking the
American perimeter next to the village in early evening, avoided the
chickens by moving in from the other side.  The men had a good idea
nevertheless; even animals can be used as early warning in Vietnam.

     These things are said in Vietnam about intelligence flow by commanders
and men who fight there:

     (1)  It comes in greater volume than in any other war.

     (2)  Not more than 10 to 15 percent of it leads to anything worthwhile 
          -- though each lead must be followed through to hit pay dirt.

     (3)  Where there is a payoff, in nine cases out of ten, the
          information which led to the introduction of tactical forces into
          a certain area proves to be wrong in whole or in part, and
          something quite else, but still worth the effort, develops from
          the deployment.

     (4)  Development and exploitation therefore depend chiefly on what the
          tactical unit learns and does.

     (5)  Most of the intelligence which leads to worthwhile results in
          battle is collected by tactical units after they have deployed.

     These are broad propositions.  They call to mind the epigram of the
late Justice Holmes: "I always say that no generalization is worth a damn,
including this one."  But if it is granted that statements (4) and (5) are
only partially true, they put the unit commander at dead center of our
combat intelligence collecting apparatus.  It is a task that he cannot
shrug off; there is only the question of whether he will be thorough or
slipshod in his work.  Working closely and continuously with his
interpreters while in the field is one prerequisite of success.

     Nothing will be said here about the collecting and use of enemy
documents.  The unit commander gets full instruction on this subject from
higher authority within Vietnam, and to add anything would be superfluous.

     Our primary concern is with his attitude toward all people who may be
sources of information that will help him to make contact.  They are of
many kinds.  These things are to be said of them:

     (1)  Captured NVA soldiers, more so than hardcore Viet Cong, and not
          unlike the Japanese in World War II, are constrained to cooperate
          and tell most of what they know.  When they have the inclination,
          they give without being manhandled.  There is no example in the
          record of an NVA captive who, in responding readily to
          interrogation, gave false information that set up a U.S. unit in
          front of a trap.  The initially sullen enemy soldier is not apt
          to change and respond with worthwhile information.

     (2)  The people of the countryside, be they Vietnamese, Montagnards,
          Chinese, or any other, friendly or hostile, often know more about
          enemy presence or movement that they will voluntarily tell.  They
          must be sought out and questioned, or obviously there will be no
          answers.  The questioning is best done in a friendly and
          initially indirect manner.  Paying some attention to the children
          sometimes wins cooperation.  Without an interpreter, the exchange
          is made extraordinarily difficult, though there are several
          examples in the record of large results achieved through sign
          language.  The characteristics vary from tribe to tribe, but most
          Montagnard villagers have no understanding of numbers, time
          according to the clock, distances when computed in terms of miles
          or kilometers, and other basic units of measurement as we know
          them.

     (3)  All CIDG companies and their Special Force advisers doing regular
          duty and patrolling daily within any region naturally know more
          about enemy presence within it and the problem of fixing it than
          any field force likely to be committed there suddenly on such a
          mission.  Acquiring such knowledge is their specialty, their
          reason for being.  Any tactical commander who bypasses the
          opportunity to learn all he can from them when he is in their
          vicinity is not doing his best for his people or himself.

     (4)  The same thing is to be said of ARVN, Nationalist Police, ROK,
          and other allied forces, officers and men, who have served in any
          area being entered for the first time by a U.S. tactical unit. 
          Not to profit from their experience by seeking them out and
          asking what they know is a mistake.  It has happened many times
          that they had a good fix on an enemy force but withheld from
          moving to contact because their strength was insufficient. 
          Experience has also shown that, if requested, these veteran
          allies will readily provide personnel to act as scouts and guides
          for U.S. units deploying in their area of operation.

     The record indicates that the Special Force teams in Vietnam have
developed sophisticated search and surveillance systems now uniquely their
own.  These could be made of more general application by the field army to
the benefit of all.  Any tactical unit commander is well advised to make
contact with Special Force field personnel when opportunity affords to
learn more about such things.  Some of these operations are of a classified
nature though the methodology and the working rules are not a highly
sensitive subject.  The soldier troubling to make such a visit might learn
some useful new tricks besides sharing good company, usually supplied with
cold beer, for a spell.

     In the tall bush, jungle, or tropical forest, the NVA and VC make
effective, though irregular, tactical use of tree roosts, as did the
Japanese in World War II.  The upper branches serve for observation; in the
lower limbs are concealed platforms for sniping.  The enemy sets these
forward of main positions, placing them to the flank or rear of our lines
when we close.  In Operation Attleboro our people learned of this technique
a little late and several men were killed by fire from overhead until a
gunner sensed what was happening, dusted the trees with automatic fire, and
brought several of the snipers down.  Tied to the trunk by long ropes, the
bodies dangled in mid-air.  In a campaign fought near the Cambodian border,
a brigade commander complained about this enemy practice, as if it were
unfair.  His general asked him: "Well, did you think to do it, also?"  It's
a good question.  According to the record, Americans as individuals
sometimes make tactical use of trees, as when an inspired battalion
commander directed his fighting line from the upper crotch of a banyan
during Operation Geronimo II because he was trying to take prisoners and
the voice on the bullhorn would carry farther that way.  But trees are not
used for sniping and superior observation on any organized basis, though
the opportunity is there.  Why?  Too many commanders simply fail to think
of it.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                  LESSON ELEVEN - THE DEFENSIVE PERIMETER

     Procedures used in forming the defensive perimeter vary greatly along
with their effectiveness from unit to unit.  There is uniformity within a
brigade or a battalion when command at these levels continues to insist
upon it and inspects to see that the work is properly done in the field. 
Left to his own devices, the young company commander, most of the time, is
careless about perimeter organization.  That the unit repeatedly deploys
without contact tends to lull the unit into a state of indifference.  This
the attitude prevails, "If we got by last night without digging, why dig
tonight?'

     To some extent, all infantry units try to follow the tested and proved
principles and techniques of defense taught at the service schools.  But
too many do not try very hard; if they did, there would be fewer losses due
to failure to dig in deep, or to dig at all, when there was time for
digging and the men were not physically exhausted.

     The record shows conclusively that the unit disciplined to follow the
rules has never suffered a serious tactical disarrangement and invariable
sustains relatively light losses when considered against the volume of
enemy fire and the intensity of the attack.  Its production of fire is
steadier and better controlled than that of the unit that has failed to
make the best use of ground.  The movement of weapons and ammunition from
the less-threatened sectors of the perimeter to the foxholes under direct
pressure, when ammo runs low and weapons are being knocked out, is
systematic, not haphazard.

     We have cases in the book in which the rifle company was so lax about
elementary precautions in organizing for defense that there appears no
other explanation of how it escaped destruction in the fight that ensued
except that the average enemy soldier has no real skill with the rifle and
other had weapons.

     There are far more examples on the bright side.  Representative of
them are company actions out of the 4th Infantry Division's experience in
Operation Paul Revere IV in late 1966.  Yet these units were having their
baptism of fire.  The NVA attacks ranged from company-size to assault by
the reinforced battalion.  Some of the attacks were supported by heavily
concentrated mortar fire, so accurately placed as to suggest that the
weapons had been preregistered on the position.  One mortar barrage on a
single position in a fight of less than one hour was reported as hurling
between 500 and 700 rounds; through group interview of the unit, the figure
was subsequently scaled down to 300-350 rounds.  Yes, the unit under this
fire took heavy losses.  But in view of the powerful barrage that struck,
it came through splendidly.  "We had dug in right up to our chins," one
sergeant said.  Close questioning of the men established that this was no
exaggeration.

     The mortar barrage had been set to disorganize the defense preparatory
to a battalion-size assault that under cover of dark had already closed to
within approximately 200 meters of the position.  Its repulse was total. 
Not only did it fail to break the perimeter; it did not get close enough to
trade volume rifle fire with the defenders.  There can be no doubt that
deep digging, and one other tactical precaution to be discussed later,
saved this rifle unit and the supporting artillery battery.  A general rule
now being followed in Vietnam is to stop moving early enough to allow for
sufficient daylight in which to establish a solidly organized, well-dug
defensive perimeter.

     The ROK forces have had similar success on the defense since their
first major encounter with NVA troops in the rice paddies of south Tuy Hoa
(Hill 50) in January 1966.  Two battalions of NVA tried to overrun two ROK
marine companies.  The fight went three hours; when it ended, more than 400
enemy dead lay outside the ROK perimeter, while inside it the losses were
light.  ROK units have never taken a reverse while on defense in Vietnam. 
They employ no defensive tactics that are peculiarly their own; there is no
secret to their success.  What they do has been taught them by U.S. Army
advisers and can be found in our manuals.  The Korean soldier works at his
position like a mole.  The holes are dug deep and reinforced with
protective overhead over.  Tactical wire is placed to the front and
interlaced with trip flares, mines, and other anti-intrusion devices. 
Outposts are set along likely avenues of approach, far enough from the
perimeter to provide a sufficient warning interval.  Patrols are dispatched
to scout possible sites for enemy supporting weapons.  (The enemy normally
prepares such positions well before the infantry attack comes on.)  The
position prepared, it is then manned by an alert and well-supervised
soldier.  Usually, one-third of the defenders are at the ready, listening
for noise of the enemy.  Noise, light, and fire disciplines are sternly
enforced.  "Stand-to" is conducted at dusk, dawn, and, when keyed to
intelligence, in the middle of the night.

     With the average U.S. rifle company in night defense, nominally every
third man is on the alert, and the watch is two hours.  Because of the high
mobility of operations, tactical wire is not used, though the unit stays in
the same position two days or more.  It would seem prudent to harden the
base whenever any prolonged stay is in prospect, but the practice is not
generally applied.  Such a rule should be in order, most particularly when
the perimeter encloses artillery, which is high on the list of enemy
targets.  In the fight on LZ Bird, 26 December 1966, already praised here
as a highly valiant and successful defense.  American losses would have
been less and the enemy attack could not have impacted with such pronounced
initial violence, had this precaution been taken.

     The average U.S. rifle company on defense uses the buddy system, or
two men to a foxhole.  The record fully sustains this practice as having,
in this mode of warfare, an added value beyond those of affording
companionship, steadying the individual nerve, and contributing to unit
alertness.  We are dealing with a fanatic enemy, capable of acts of seeming
madness and utter desperation.  Often, the lone fighter is not prepared to
cope with the frenzy of an attacker thus possessed.  Two men can; one man's
courage rubs off on the other.  From Paul Revere IV and earlier operations,
the record has numerous entries of foxhole buddies, working together,
manhandling, and at last vanquishing a demonic adversary, where one man
would have failed.  Example: The NVA soldier charges directly in and jumps
into the foxhole.  One man, tackling him around the knees, wrestles him
down, works on him with a machete, and cuts through the shoulder to the
bone so that the arm dangles by flesh.  The American by then is atop the
still-struggling enemy.  His buddy, trying to help, but having no clear
shot at the target, puts three bullets from his M-16 into the enemy's legs. 
The figure goes limp.  The two Americans toss the body out of the
perimeter, thinking the man dead.  It lands on the back of a company aid
man who grabs the nigh-severed arm and is astonished to see it spin a
complete circle.  The corpse comes alive and struggles with the aid man. 
He is killed at last, beaten to death with an entrenching tool.

     Some companies use the three-man foxhole; there are sound arguments
for it and the results seem more satisfactory, insuring maximum rest
combined with the required degree of alertness.  Terrain -- the possession
of high ground for the defensive position -- has little value in Vietnam
compared with former wars.  What is important is that the position be
compact; weakness, vulnerability come rather from overextension, trying to
cover too much ground, thereby shortening the field of fire, and lessening
mutual support, foxhole to foxhole.

     Trip flares and other alarm or anti-intrusion devices, including the
Claymore, are not employed regularly and consistently by all units on the
defense, though they are invariably carried along.  There is no general
explanation other than lack of command insistence.  The Claymore is
employed more than any other fixture outward from the perimeter.  Lately
the NVA enemy has acquired the nasty habit of sneaking forward a few hands
in the early stages of a fight who wriggle in on their bellies to where
they can cut the Claymore wires.  The Viet Cong enemy frequently improves
on that trick.  In January 1967, for example, a platoon from 25th Infantry
Division conducted a small night operation on the outskirts of Vinh Cu and
was attacked while in defensive position.  Reports the witness: "I went out
to get my Claymore only to find that the mine had been turned around. 
Faced as it was, it could have wiped out the people in four of our
positions had we fired it during the fight."  (The battery-powered,
tripwire-type anti-intrusion device has little appeal and goes almost
unused.  In all operations, we found only one lieutenant who thought it
worthwhile and strung the wire regularly.)

     Outposts, giving way to listening posts after dark, are set generally
and routinely by platoons and rifle companies on defense along each likely
avenue of approach, with about this one exception: a unit rigging ambushes
on trails adjacent to the perimeter rarely sets up outposts as well.  Two
or three men usually compose an OP or LP.  They do not dig in as a rule. 
One man is supposed to stay alert; the others sleep.  Though frowned upon,
smoking on OP and LP, and within the perimeter, is common.  (An exception
is in Special Force detachments on patrol where smoking is prohibited.  The
rule is respected because, among other effects, "smoking makes the sense of
smell less acute.")  Sometimes the LP is connected with the perimeter, and
sometimes not; this variation is arbitrary and in no way related to the
distance between the post and the main body.  Where there are four platoons
on perimeter, there will usually be four OP'S or LP's.  Generally each
platoon sets out one LP to cover the main approach into its sector.  When
the RT is used on LP duty, a prearranged signal (so many clicks on the
push-to-talk button) warns of the approach of enemy force and gives its
size.

     LP's located at real distance from the defensive perimeter are not
only of vital service to security but invariably safer for their occupants. 
At least half the time in Vietnam, according to the record, the defense is
established on ground that permits siting LP'S for maximum effectiveness. 
Yet rare indeed is an LP posted more than 50 meters from the foxhole line;
far more frequently, where the terrain and vegetation outward from the
perimeter are clear enough for the men on LP to run back to the main body
the posting is too close to be of much use or there is none whatever.

     In the 4th Infantry Division's fight near the Cambodian border in late
November 1966, three men were on LP duty 350 meters west of the perimeter. 
They heard an NVA rifleman as he crawled over a pile of logs not more than
10 meters away.  Certain they had not been seen, they slipped backward a
few feet to get a clearer view of him and have more freedom of action.  All
three then blasted him with the greater part of three magazines of M-16
fire.  Their volleying tripped off the enemy mortar attack before the NVA
line had advanced to more than even with the LP.  The mortars started,
fired a few rounds, then broke off when the enemy realized that something
had gone wrong.  (It is assumed that small arms fire was the prearranged
signal for the enemy mortarmen to begin their supporting fires.)  The NVA
line was still far short of closing distance.  Thus the attack became
unhinged.  The three Americans, going on a dead run for the perimeter, made
it in time to alert the defenders to what was coming.

     In another perimeter defense in Paul Revere IV one LP, equipped with a
radio though it was only 30 meters from the foxhole line, was dead in the
way of the enemy line of advance.  One soldier got off the warning; it
helped not at all because by then the attack had broken against the main
body, and within seconds the soldier was down and dying and crying for an
aid man.  Initial confusion in a sector of the perimeter arose out of
distress over the man and the desire to rescue him.  Temporarily, it
inhibited fire in decisive volume from the one platoon that was under the
heaviest and most direct pressure, though it shortly got going,
semireconciled to the loss of the lone man on the LP.

     According to the record, this is a not uncommon incident.  Something
of the sort happens often enough to warrant raising the question: do LP's
placed at only 20 to 35 meters from the perimeter have sufficient warning
value in this form of warfare to justify their use?  The extra danger to
men so placed is hardly debatable.  The brief time interval is not enough
to allow the alerting of the armed circle.  Time after time, because the
LP's have been overrun, greater jeopardy is visited on the main body.  The
command places a certain amount of reliance on them though they have little
chance to do the work for which they are intended.

     There is no evidence on record in Vietnam that any U.S. rifle company,
having set up for night defense by perimeter, has been wholly overrun,
though the story was too frequently otherwise in Korea.  Many such
positions in Vietnam have been cracked, and others have taken hard
punishment, but the ground has always been held until the enemy withdrew or
the command decision was made that it was no longer worth the fight.  The
unit sometimes gets out; none has ever been driven out.  The same cannot be
said of platoon perimeters, the reason being they do not have enough fire
power to withstand a hard-pressed attack.  They are as insecure as was the
company perimeter atop a Korean ridge.  The comparison rather clearly
bespeaks the scale of the war and the relative ineffectiveness of the
enemy, NVA or VC, in the attack.  Use of the company perimeter as the basic
defensive element, careful tying-in of weapons, and alertness will beat him
every time.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                 LESSON TWELVE - POLICING THE BATTLEFIELD

     Policing of the battle field, or tidying-up as the British say, is an
ancient custom in armies, and more of a necessity in Vietnam than in wars
of our past.  The reasons are already well known to troops before they
arrive in Vietnam.  Not only is the debris of war so repulsive and
unwholesome that having as little of it about as possible is just another
part of good housekeeping, but denying to the enemy anything and everything
that may be of use to him is the interest of self-preservation.

     So there is nothing novel or unreasonable about the requirement put
upon troops that they strip the scenes of action and the routes over which
they move of everything that the enemy might turn to a fighting purpose or
use to help his forces in any other way.  Every dud grenade or unexploded
artillery shell left behind is a gift to the Viet Cong.  Any discarded C-
ration tin can be transformed into a booby trap.  The enemy is good at such
tricks, and nine times out of ten he will return to the field to look for
free items he can add to his bag soon after we depart it.

     A fundamental consideration in any discussion about policing the field
is the soldier's load, for it goes to the heart of the problem.  Why does
the field get lettered?  Even though the soldier's load has been discussed
and analyzed by experts perhaps more than any other subject in warfare, the
record in Vietnam still shows that the average infantry soldier crashes
through the jungle weighted down like a pack mule.  When he finds the
enemy, he must always unload the rucksack or the heavy pack in order to
move more quickly about the battlefield.  It is not uncommon to find
soldiers saddled with five days' C-rations, which weigh about 15 pounds. 
Their commanders proudly report, "Five days' rations give my men freedom
from resupply; they can move with the speed and stealth of a guerrilla." 
In actual fact, mobility is decreased because of these heavy loads and the
soldier is physically worn down by midday.  Fatigue affects alertness,
making him vulnerable to the enemy's designs.

     The good commander takes a hard look at every item that his soldiers
carry.  What they do not absolutely require he eliminates.  At all times it
should be a main aim to lighten the load of his men.  For the soldier in
Vietnam like the soldier of World War II and Korea will throw away or lose
anything he does not need, or thinks he may not need tomorrow -- and before
another day has passed the enemy will have picked it up.

     These lines from a book published by the Department of Defense should
be read again by unit commanders in the light of our Vietnam experience:
"Extravagance and wastefulness are somewhat rooted in the American
character because of our mode of life.  When our men enter military
service, there is a strong holdover of their prodigal civilian habits. 
Even under fighting conditions, they tend to be wasteful of water, food,
munitions, and other vital supply.  When such things are too accessible
they tend to throw them away rather than conserve them in the general
interest."

     Because of this fault in our makeup, combat leaders in Vietnam have to
keep prodding their men to police the premises before quitting the
perimeter and moving on.  The distinguishing feature of this discipline is
the heavy accent that has to be given it because we are fighting a
guerrilla enemy and no piece of open country is likely to be held by our
people for very long.

     What is new and different about the war in Vietnam is the emphasis put
upon the tallying of enemy dead at the same time that the field is being
policed.  Where circumstances permit and members of the unit are not
subjected to additional jeopardy, they are required to tally the manpower
losses of the enemy as conscientiously as they are required to set about
possessing the weapons that he leaves on a field from which his forces have
withdrawn.

     These two requirements need to be discussed and understood in one
context.  The heavier burden put upon troops adds up to a somewhat onerous
task and not one they would undertake of their own volition.  Like so much
of war's drudgery, however, it is still acceptable, so long as doing the
job does not subject the men to extremes of risk.

     None but a foolhardy soldier would voluntarily charge forward against
fire from an enemy rifle line so that he might wrest an AK47 or SKS from
Viet Cong hands to claim it as a souvenir, though he would be denying the
enemy that one weapon.  Body count is governed by the same principle that
underlies this negative example.  It should not be ordered when there is
clearly present the prospect of increased risk for the unit or the
likelihood of more casualties; nor should it be ordered when there is a
more pressing military object immediately to be served.

     Time and tactical opportunity wait on no man.  Take one example.  A
U.S. unit in perimeter defense clearly witnesses the temporary withdrawal
from the immediate vicinity of the enemy force that has been pressing the
attack.  Given the choice in the breathing space of one or the other, only
an unthinking commander would put the counting of bodies outside his lines
ahead of possessing the weapons scattered there.  The enemy may swarm back
and, by pressing home the attack again, manage to extract the bodies.  But
if the weapons are left there and he recovers them, they could help him
overrun the position.  The bodies do him no good; they merely burden his
withdrawal.  And all we lose by letting him get away with them is a
comforting statistic.

     We are pointing out only that body counting at the wrong time, or at
the sacrifice of real tactical opportunity, can be both dangerous and time-
wasting.  It is not a task or object of such transcendent importance as to
warrant taking additional casualties, though any small-unit commander may
make it such by getting confused about his priorities.  Emphasizing body
count until it obscures the more legitimate interest of security and
mobility is ever a mistake on his part.  In its possible consequences it
differs in degree from the requirement to police the combat field.  When
the young commander, having won his fight, pushes out his tidying-up
patrols before he has done a proper job of reconnoitering for enemy
presence just beyond the foreground, he is wrong, dead wrong.

     Examples that make the point dot the record.  Item.  A fight is not
even halfway along.  Pressure on the unit leader is mounting by the minute. 
But already higher command is putting additional pressure on him to police
the field and get the bodies counted in the proper time.  It is his duty to
bear with it: he is still the judge of the right time and circumstance. 
Item.  A U.S. rifle company in a good defensive position atop a ridge is
taking steady toll of an NVA force attacking up hill.  The skipper sends a
four-man patrol to police weapons and count bodies.  Three men return
bearing the fourth, who was wounded before the job was well started. 
Another patrol is sent.  The same thing happens.  The skipper says, "Oh, to
hell with it!"  Item.  In Operation Nathan Hale three men working through a
banana grove were hit by sniper fire.  They were counting bodies.
Item.  In Operation Paul Revere IV a much-admired line sergeant was killed,
two other enlisted men were wounded, and a lieutenant barely escaped
ambush, when the four together were "tidying up" the field.  They ran into
a stay-behind party planted in a thicket on the morning after the fight.

     Small-unit leaders have to understand that the requirement, though
urgent, is not that urgent.  Body-counting is of lesser moment than the
chance to kill and capture still more of the enemy in the hour when
effective pursuit is possible.  As Marshal Foch said, "If you reach the
stop one minute after the bus is gone you miss it."  One of the comments
often made by Americans fighting in Vietnam is that the enemy has greater
skill at breaking contact than any soldier ever engaged by our forces.  A
unit commander only adds to the enemy's reputation when he rates keeping
contact and maintaining pursuit as secondary to counting bodies simply
because such tallying is a duty on his checklist.

     No solution to fit every possible variation of this problem can be
recommended.  A few suggestions are put forward to assist the small-unit
commander in arriving at his own solution.  He is the man on the spot and
the best judge of the situation, and it is his decision that will cure or
kill.  To him belong the options involving the immediate safety and best
interest of this command, in the light of what he knows about the
situation.  If he believes that a present, but unmeasured, danger forbids
body counting or that a more urgent military object should come first, he
need only have the courage of his own convictions in coming to that
decision.  No one may rightly press him to trade lives for bodies.

     Out of data based on more than 100 actions by rifle companies and
platoons, it can be fairly estimated that the physical and tactical
difficulties besetting a unit in the hour when the fight ended precluded
the possibility of a body count at least 60 percent of the time.  Still
more significantly, and with very rare exceptions, where a body count had
been reported and was therefore entered into the record, analysis of what
really happened in the fight leads to the conclusion that the enemy
actually lost more dead than the number reported.  Overall, what was
claimed and reported, on the basis of the data afforded by the fight
itself, appeared to be an understatement of the casualties inflicted on the
enemy. 

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                        LESSON THIRTEEN - TRAINING

     Our mistakes in Vietnam are neither new nor startling.  They are not
something we can blame on the mysteries of the warfare.  They are the same
problems that have been haunting small-unit commanders since before Gideon. 
The mistakes we are talking about will not likely cause a unit to take a
beating.  But they will inflict on it needless casualties.  In peace or war
these errors spell the difference between professionalism and mediocrity.

     Many young leaders, enchanted by the Hollywood image of war, approach
combat with the good-guy-versus-the-bad-guy attitude.  But there is no
similarity between what John Wayne gets away with on the screen and the
hot, hard facts of the fire fight.  A small-unit leader in combat cannot
afford to have a film hero's devil-may-care attitude toward training,
discipline, and basic soldiering.

     In the recipe for battle victory, well-led and disciplined soldiers
are the main ingredient, soldiers who have been conditioned by thorough
training to react by habit when confronted with the searing realities of
engagement.  The habits learned in training -- good or bad -- are the same
habits that move the soldier in combat.  A leader, then, must insure that
each of his soldiers is well trained and has developed good habits --
habits so deeply ingrained through correct reaching and intensive practice
that even under the pressure of fear and sudden danger each soldier,
automatically, will do the right thing.

     There is no magic formula or sweatless solution by which one can
achieve this goal.  Leaders may approach training for combat only with
intense dedication, accepting as gospel the timeless truth that better-
trained men live longer on the battlefield.

     No military unit is ever completely trained.  There will always be a
weak area that requires additional time and effort.  The wise commander
uses all available time to train his unit; he never says, "Good enough." 
In Vietnam he can continue to train constantly -- in the assembly area, in
the reserve position, and during the execution of the mission.  Leaders
must accept the old but absolute maxim: "The more sweat on the training
field, the less blood on the battlefield."

     An alert leader constantly stresses essential battlefield arts and
skills: fire and maneuver; marksmanship; camouflage and concealment;
communication; maintenance; noise, light, and fire discipline; scouting and
patrolling; woodcraft; mines and boobytraps; and field sanitation.  And he
makes on-the-spot corrections with the same precision as he does in
dismounted drill.

     If a soldier is firing from the wrong side of a tree, the leader tells
him what he is doing wrong, and why.  If the soldier is wandering around
without his weapon during an exercise, the leader tells him that he is
being fired on by an enemy sniper and that he should take cover and return
the fire.  When the soldier looks at him dumbfounded and says, "I can't
because my rifle is over there," then the leader tells him he is "dead" and
makes him lie where he was "killed" for a couple of hours.

     The good leader forms a checklist habit.  Combat is too serious a
business to permit easy excuse of even one mistake.  If a unit is going on
a patrol, setting up an ambush, establishing a defensive position, or
conducting an airmobile assault, he should pull out his checklist and
insure that every point is checked off.  Many checklists are available
throughout the Army and in Vietnam, but in the main they are far too
complicated and tend to fog up the issue with unnecessary details.

     A simple checklist which underscores the salient points of the
operation at hand will stimulate recall.  Battle experience has
conclusively proven that fatigue, fright, and preoccupation with the
routine tend to cloud and distort the memory.

     The good leader practices giving a five-paragraph operations order. 
He is never so much of an "old pro" that he can do without the tried and
proven form.  He makes sure his people use it too, and he listens to
subordinates issuing their orders.  If he knows his business, he will know
whether they are following correct troop leading procedures and whether
they have heeded their lessons.  To plan his operation and issue his orders
in the same detail and with the same precision as if he were taking his
first ATT (Army Training Test) and an umpire were breathing down his neck -
- that should be the object.  The voice of experience might well say to
him: "Never quit checking.  Check everything all the time -- weapons for
cleanliness, aidmen for supplies, sentries for alertness, and the camp for
field sanitation."

     Many young leaders in Vietnam think that if they will it, the thing
will be done.  Seldom did we find one who adequately checked to see if his
orders were being carried out.  The order-giving process has three main
elements: (1) formulation; (2) issuance; and (3) supervision.  All are
interrelated and act upon one another.  The successful leader will look to
all three elements and make sure they are in balance before he concludes
that his unit has been readied to the best of his ability for the impending
action.

                        V I E T N A M   P R I M E R



                    LESSON FOURTEEN - THE STRANGE ENEMY

     A more bizarre, eccentric foe than the one in Vietnam is not to be
met, and it is best that troops be told of his peculiar ways lest they be
unnerved by learning of them for the first time during combat.  He may blow
whistles or sound bugles to initiate the assault; or he may trip the fight
with a flare or the beating of a bongo drum.  But he does not come on in a
"banzai charge."  That description of him, for example in stories about
Operation Attleboro, is a bit of press fiction.  The "banzai charges" in
reality amounted to about 50 men walking forward in line against a two-
platoon front.  They did not yell; they screamed only when they were hit. 
Then meters from where they started they were mowed down or turned back. 
In the second "banzai charge" only 30 men so acted; the third time there
were 12.

     It is in many small ways that the enemy in Vietnam deviates from what
we consider normal, sometimes to the stupefaction of our people.  Nerves
get jangled when in a fire fight joined at close range men hear maniacal
laughter from the pack out there in the darkness just a few feet beyond the
foxhole.  Catcalls, the group yelling of phrases and curses in English, the
calling out of the full name of several men in the unit -- such
psychological tricks are likely to be trotted out at any time.

     In one of the company fights in Paul Revere IV, a voice from a bamboo
clump not more than 10 meters from the foxhole line shouted, "Hey, how's
your company commander?"

     One American, not at all jumpy, yelled back, "Mine's great; how's
yours?"

     The voice replied, "No good; you just killed him."

     During the hottest part of the defense on LZ Bird, with the NVA in
large numbers inside the perimeter, the Americans still in the fight were
astonished to see enemy skirmishers break into their tents, emerge arms
laden with fruit cakes, boxes of cookies, and sacks of candy, then squat on
the fire-swept field and eat the goodies.

     In that same fight one U.S. rifleman, not in anyway hurt, feigned
death when an enemy party came upon him.  The NVA took none of his
possessions and did not try to roll him.  The soldier lying next to him,
already wounded, was shot dead and his pockets were picked clean.

     In Operation Paul Revere, an NVA soldier walked into a U.S. outpost of
two men after dark, sat beside one of them who was half asleep, and started
talking to him in perfect English.  The interloper even leaned on the
American, who in his stupor thought this was his buddy who was sprawled out
sleeping several feet away.  The monologue went on several minutes.  By the
time our man finally became aware of what was happening, the North
Vietnamese was strolling away.  He made it clean without a shot being
fired.

     In Operation Cedar Falls, enemy soldiers hid in water holes along the
creek banks like so many muskrats.  The entrances were below the surface. 
Our skirmishers could hear their voices a few feet away but could not find
them.  In the same fight, within the Iron Triangle, a party on ambush at
night sensed a particularly pungent smell in the air which only one man
could identify.  "I know it," he said.  "That's pot [marihuana]."  It was a
first warning of enemy presence.

     In one of the mad scenes in Operation Irving, more than a platoon of
enemy vanished into subsurface water holes along a river bank.  Bamboo,
bored through to form a pipe, serves as louvers for these chambers.  U.S.
cavalrymen spotted the telltale signs, stripped naked, got down into the
stream, and fished the NVA out of the holes.

     On a long patrol in January 1967, a Mike Force led by Special Force
personnel, was shadowed for 10 days by one Viet Cong.  He kept a copious
diary, relating that he could not understand what the column was trying to
do or where it was heading because of its zigzag movement.  But along with
his diary entries he had carefully written down the plan and maneuver to be
used by several enemy battalions gathering to envelop the Mike Force.  On
the eleventh day, making one false move, he was shot dead.  The diary was
found on him, and the column walked away from the trap.

     Another snapshot from Operation Cedar Falls.  Nine Americans were in
an ambush position.  One group of 14 Viet Cong kept circling the ground for
two hours.  Then one of their number walked to within five feet of the
muzzle of the machinegun, knelt down, and lit a candle to look at a wounded
man struck down by the same gun a few minutes before.

     An ambush patrol from 1st Infantry Division, based at Di An, was in a
night operation near War Zone D.  The men had already made a killing, and
because their leader had an intuition that the Viet Cong were out in force
that night they rapidly shifted position to stronger ground.  The leader
asked for illumination and Smokey the Bear (a flare ship) came over.  When
the lights popped on, instead of having a view of the river banks 250
meters to their fore, the men were "dazzled by an array of shining objects
that seemed to be moving" between them and the stream.  This dazzling band
was about 100 meters wide and six feet tall.  Feeling themselves
threatened, for want of anything better to do the troops opened fire with
M-16's and machineguns.  The shining objects began falling.  Then fire came
against the Americans.  At last they understood.  These were Viet Cong --
several platoons of them.  The VC had been advancing, each one carrying in
front of him a sheet of roofing tin that screened his body wholly.  Why? 
No one ever found out. It was just another mystery, wholly baffling to the
Americans.  One of them said, "It was screwier than Macbeth."

     There are these tales and many more about our odd foe.  The full
measure of his strange nature is yet to be taken.  We will continue to
endure it in its military manifestations so long as the fighting goes on. 
To accustom the American soldier to expect the unexpected may be too much
to expect, but he can be braced to the probability that when he engages the
VC or NVA the most unlikely things will happen.  Getting to know them
better is a large part of the game.INDEX
